# RSTP and EtherChannel Configuration
## RSTP Configuration
### STP Modes and Standards
- When STP was the only STP standard back in the 1990s with 802.1D, Cisco created the STP-based <b>Per VLAN Spanning Tree Plus (PVST+)</b> protocol, which creates one spanning tree instance per VLAN.
- When the IEEE introduced RSTP (in 802.1D amendment 802.1w, in the year 2001), Cisco also created the <b>Rapid PVST+ (RPVST+)</b> protocol. RPVST+ provided more features than standardized RSTP, including one tree per VLAN.
- The IEEE did not adopt Cisco’s PVST+ or RPVST+ into their standards to create multiple spanning trees. Instead, the IEEE created a different method: <b>Multiple Spanning Tree Protocol (MSTP)</b>, originally defined in 802.1Q amendment 802.1s.

<code>panning-tree mode</code> :
|Name|Based on|# Trees|IEEE standard|Config parameter|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|STP|STP|1 (CST)|802.1D|N/A|
|PVST+|STP|1/VLAN|802.1D|pvst|
|RSTP|RSTP|1 (CST)|802.1w|N/A|
|RPVTS+|RSTP|1/VLAN|802.1w|rapid-pvts|
|MSTP|RSTP|1 or more|802.1s|mst|

### The Bridge ID and System ID Extension
To support the idea of multiple spanning trees, whether one per VLAN or simply multiple as created with MSTP, the protocols must consider the VLANs and VLAN trunking. (That’s one reason why RSTP and MSTP now exist as part of the 802.1Q standard, which defines VLANs and VLAN trunking.) 
Originally, a switch’s BID was formed by combining the switch’s 2-byte priority and its 6-byte MAC address. The revised rules divide the original priority field into two separate fields: 
- 4-bit priority field (Multiple of 4096)
- 12-bit subfield called the system ID extension (which represents the VLAN ID).

Cisco switches let you configure the BID, but only the priority part.

<code>spanning-tree vlan vlan-id priority x</code> requires a decimal number between 0 and 65,535. But not just any number in that range will suffice; it must be a multiple of 4096


Cisco provides a convenient means to create a primary and secondary root switch concept with out configuring an actual number:

<code>spanning-tree vlan x root primary</code> (on the switch that should be primary) 
<code>spanning-tree vlan x root secondary</code> (on the switch that should be secondary)

The command with root primary or root secondary does not appear in the configuration. When configuring root primary, the switch looks at the priority of the current root switch and chooses either (a) 24,576 or (b) 4096 less than the current root’s priority (if the current root’s priority is 24,576 or less) to the configuration instead. When configuring, root secondary always results in that switch using a priority of 28,672, with the assumption that the value will be less than other switches that use the default of 32,768, and higher than any switch configured as root primary.


### RSTP Methods to Support Multiple Spanning Trees
Having an extra 12-bit field in the BID works well in practice because it can be used to identify the VLAN ID. VLAN IDs range from 1 to 4094, requiring 12 bits.

- RSTP creates one tree—the Common Spanning Tree (CST)—while RPVST+ creates one tree for each and every VLAN.
- RSTP sends one set of RSTP messages (BPDUs) in the network, no matter the number of VLANs, while RPVST+ sends one set of messages per VLAN.
- RSTP and RPVST+ use different destination MAC addresses: RSTP with multicast address 0180.C200.0000 (an address defined in the IEEE standard), and RPVST+ with multicast address 0100.0CCC.CCCD (an address chosen by Cisco).
- When transmitting messages on VLAN trunks, RSTP sends the messages in the native VLAN with no VLAN header/tag. RPVST+ sends each VLAN’s messages inside that
VLAN—for instance, BPDUs about VLAN 9 have an 802.1Q header that lists VLAN 9.
- RPVST+ adds an extra type-length value (TLV) to the BPDU that identifies the VLAN ID, while RSTP does not (because it does not need to, as RSTP ignores VLANs.)
- Both view the 16-bit priority as having a 12-bit System ID Extension, with RSTP setting the value to 0000.0000.0000, meaning “no VLAN,” while RPVST+ uses the VLAN ID.

Standard RSTP behaves as if VLANs do not exist, while Cisco’s RPVST+ integrates VLAN information into the entire process.

### Other RSTP Configuration Options

- Switch Priority: The global command spanning-tree vlan x priority y lets an engineer set the switch’s priority in that VLAN.
- Primary and Secondary Root Switches: The global command spanning-tree vlan x root primary | secondary also lets you set the priority, but the switch decides on a value to make that switch likely to be the primary root switch (the root) or the secondary root switch (the switch that becomes root if the primary fails).
- Port Costs: The interface subcommand spanning-tree [vlan x] cost y lets an engineer set the switch’s STP/RSTP cost on that port, either for all VLANs or for a specific VLAN on that port. Changing those costs then changes the root cost for some switches, which impacts the choice of root ports and designated ports.

## Configuring Layer 2 EtherChannel

Without EtherChannel, a switch treats each physical port as an independent port, applying MAC learning, forwarding, and STP logic per physical port. With EtherChannel, the switch applies all those same processes to a group of physical ports as one entity: the EtherChannel. Without EtherChannel, with parallel links between two switches, STP/RSTP would block all links except one, but with EtherChannel, the switch can use all the links, load balancing the traffic over the links.

The switches also require a variety of other interface settings to match among all the links in the channel.

### Configuring a Manual Layer 2 EtherChannel
IOS uses the channel-group configuration command, but then to display its status, IOS uses the show etherchannel command. Then the output of this show command refers to neither an “EtherChannel” nor a “Channel-group,” instead using the term “PortChannel.”

- <code>channel-group number mode on </code> command in interface configuration mode under each physical interface that should be in the channel to add it to the channel.
- Use the same number for all commands on the same switch, but the channelgroup number on the neighboring switch can differ.

### Configuring Dynamic EtherChannels
Cisco-proprietary <b>Port Aggregation Protocol (PAgP)</b> and the IEEE standard <b>Link Aggregation Control Protocol (LACP)</b> : negotiate so that only links that pass the configuration checks are actually used in an EtherChannel.

LACP does support more links in a channel—16—as compared to PaGP’s maximum of 8. With LACP, only 8 can be active at one time, with the others waiting to be used should any of the other links fail.

<code>channel-group</code> configuration commands: 
-  desirable and auto keywords enable PAgP
-  active and passive keywords enable LACP

At least one side has to begin the negotiations. In other words, with PAgP, at least one of the two sides must use desirable, and with LACP, at least one of the two sides must use active.

<br>

    Do not use the on parameter on one end, and either auto or desirable (or for LACP, active or passive) on the neighboring switch. The on option uses neither PAgP nor LACP, so a configuration that uses on, with PAgP or LACP options on the other end, would prevent the EtherChannel from working.

<code>channel-group 2 mode desirable</code>

<code>show etherchannel 1 port-channel</code>

### Physical Interface Configuration and EtherChannels

New physical interface’s settings must be the same as the existing ports’ settings; otherwise, the switch does not add the new link to the list of approved and working interfaces in the channel. 

The list of items the switch checks includes the following:


- Speed 
- Duplex 
- Operational access or trunking state (all must be access, or all must be trunks) 
- If an access port, the access VLAN 
- If a trunk port, the allowed VLAN list (per the switchport trunk allowed command) 
- If a trunk port, the native VLAN
- STP interface settings

Switches check the settings on the neighboring switch. To do so, the switches either use PAgP or LACP (if already in use) or use Cisco Discovery Protocol (CDP) if using manual configuration. When checking neighbors, all settings except the STP settings must match.

The PortChannel and physical interfaces must be shutdown, and then no shutdown, to recover from the err-disabled state.

### EtherChannel Load Distribution

When using Layer 2 EtherChannels, a switch’s MAC learning process associates MAC addresses with the PortChannel interfaces and not the underlying physical ports. Later, when a switch makes a forwarding decision to send a frame out a PortChannel interface, the switch must do more work: to decide out which specific physical port to use to forward the frame. IOS documentation refers to those rules as EtherChannel load distribution or load balancing. 

### Configuration Options for EtherChannel Load Distribution

<code>port-channel load-balance { src-mac, dst-mac, src-dst-mac, src-ip, dst-ip, src-dst-ip, src-port, dst-port, src-dst-port} </code>

! some switches may support only MAC-based methods, or only MAC- and IP-based methods.

The algorithms first intend to avoid message reordering, make use of the switch forwarding ASICs, and use all the active links. However, the algorithm does not attempt to send the exact same number of bits over each link over time. 

The more variety in the values in the fields, the better the balancing effects, and the lower the chance of sending disproportionate amounts of traffic over one link.

<code> test etherchannel load-balance</code>