# Operating Cisco Routers
channel service unit/data service unit (CSU/DSU)
Cisco 4321 ISR, with some of the more important features highlighted. The top part of the figure shows a full view of the back of the router. This model comes with two built-in Gigabit Ethernet interfaces and two modular slots that allow you to add small cards called Network Interface Modules (NIMs).

* Many Cisco router models have an auxiliary (Aux) port, intended to be connected to an external modem and phone line to allow remote users to dial in to the router, and access the CLI, by making a phone call. Cisco switches do not have auxiliary ports.
* Router IOS defaults to disallow both Telnet and SSH into the router because of the typical router default setting of transport input none in vty configuration mode. (Cisco Catalyst LAN switches typically default to allow both Telnet and SSH.) Chapter 6, “Configuring Basic Switch Management,” already discussed the various options on this command to enable Telnet (transport input telnet), SSH (transport input ssh), or both (transport input all or transport input telnet ssh).

- Cisco Layer 2 switches support the show mac address-table command, while Cisco routers do not.
- Cisco routers support the show ip route command, while Cisco Layer 2 switches do not. 
- Cisco Layer 2 switches use the show interfaces status command to list one line of output per interface (and routers do not), while routers use the show ip interface brief command to list similar information (but switches do not).
Note also that some Cisco devices perform both Layer 2 switching and Layer 3 routing, and those devices support both router and switch commands.

Some Cisco routers have serial interfaces. Cisco routers use serial interfaces to connect to a serial link. Each point-to-point serial link can then use High-Level Data Link Control (HDLC, the default) or Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP).

<code>show ip interface brief</code><br>
<code>show interfaces</code>

#### Interface Status Codes
Each interface has two interface status codes. To be usable, the two interface status codes must be in an “up” state. The first status code refers essentially to whether Layer 1 is working, and the second status code mainly (but not always) refers to whether the data-link layer protocol is working.

|Line Status|Protocol Status|Typical Reason|
|---|---|---|
|Administratively down|Down|The interface has a shutdown command configured on it.|
|Down|Down|The interface is not shutdown, but the physical layer has a problem. For example, no cable has been attached to the interface, or with Ethernet, the switch interface on the other end of the cable is shut down, or the switch is powered off, or the devices on the ends of the cable use a different transmission speed.|
|Up|Down|Almost always refers to data-link layer problems, most often configuration problems. For example, serial links have this combination when one router was configured to use PPP and the other defaults to use HDLC.|
|Up|Up|Layer 1 and Layer 2 of this interface are functioning.|

Most Cisco router interfaces default to a disabled (shutdown) state and should be enabled with the no shutdown interface subcommand.
<code>ip address address mask</code><br>
<code># show protocols</code> command confirms the state of each of the interfaces and the IP address and mask configured on those same interfaces.

#### Router Auxiliary Port
most Cisco routers have an extra physical port called an auxiliary (Aux) port. The Aux port typically serves as a means to make a phone call to connect into the router to issue commands from the CLI.
The Aux port works like the console port, except that the Aux port is typically connected through a cable to an external analog modem, which in turn connects to a phone line. Then, the engineer uses a PC, terminal emulator, and modem to call the remote router. 

Aux ports can be configured beginning with the line aux 0 command to reach aux line configuration mode