# Configuring IPv4 Addresses and Static Routes

## IP Routing
default gateway and default router

The router receives a frame, removes the packet from inside the frame, decides where to forward the packet, puts the packet into another frame, and sends the frame.

The router uses the data-link trailer’s FCS field to check the frame, and if errors occurred in transmission, the
router discards the frame. (The router makes no attempt at error recovery;

Frames sent to the router’s unicast MAC address for that interface are clearly sent to that router. However, a router can actually receive a frame sent to some other unicast MAC address, and routers should ignore these frames.

## Configuring IP Addresses and Connected Routes
* <b>Connected routes</b>: Added because of the configuration of the ip address interface subcommand on the local router 
* <b>Static routes</b>: Added because of the configuration of the ip route global command on the local router 
* <b>Routing protocols</b>: Added as a function by configuration on all routers, resulting in a process by which routers dynamically tell each other about the network so that they all learn routes


router automatically adds a route to its routing table for the subnet connected to each interface as long as :

* The interface is in a working state , line status of up and a protocol status of up.
* interface has an IP address assigned through the ip address interface subcommand.

<code># show ip route</code> command, which lists these routes with a c as the route code, meaning connected.

 local route : defines a route for the one specific IP address configured on the router interface. Each local route has a /32 prefix length, defining a host route

 ### The ARP Table on a Cisco Router
  by default, IOS will time out (remove) an ARP table entry after 240 minutes in which the entry is not used
  <code> clear ip arp [ip-address]</code>

## Configuring Static Routes
* <b>static route</b> is considered a network route when the destination listed in the ip route command defines a subnet, or an entire Class A, B, or C network. 
* <b>default route</b> matches all destination IP addresses
* <b>host route</b> matches a single IP address (that is, an address of one host.)
<br><hr>

    ip route 172.16.2.0 255.255.255.0 S0/0/0 
    ip route 172.16.3.0 255.255.255.0 172.16.5.3

Both are static routes. However, the route that used the outgoing interface configuration is also noted as a connected route. 
 if S0/0/0 interface fails, router removes the static route to 172.16.2.0/24 from the IPv4 routing table.

 static routes that will send packets out an Ethernet interface—LAN or WAN—should use the next-hop IP address option on the ip address command. Routers expect their Ethernet interfaces to be able to reach any number of other IP addresses in the connected subnet. Referencing the next-hop router identifies the specific device in the connected subnet, while referencing the local router’s outgoing inter-
face does not identify the specific neighboring router.

### Static Host Routes
routers use the most specific route (that is, the route with the longest prefix length
### Floating Static Routes
administrative distance, with lower being better, and then use the route learned from the better source.
By default, IOS gives static routes an administrative distance of 1 and OSPF routes an administrative distance of
110
 floating static route floats or moves into and out of the IP routing table depending on whether the better (lower) administrative distance route learned by the routing protocol happens to exist currently. Basically, the router ignores the static route during times when the better routing
protocol route is known.

<code>ip route 172.16.2.0 255.255.255.0 172.16.5.3 130</code>

### Static Default Routes
the router might not match the packet’s destination IP address with any route. When that happens, the router normally just discards the packet.


default route matches all packets, so that if a packet does not match any other more specific route in the routing table, the router can at least forward the
packet based on the default route.
<code>ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 S0/0/1</code>

### Troubleshooting Static Routes

- ip route commands that list an outgoing interface : that interface must be in an up/up state, unless using use the <code>permanent</code> keyword. 
- ip route commands that list a next-hop IP address : the local router must have a route to reach that next-hop address.

## IP Forwarding with the Longest Prefix Match
When a particular destination IP address matches more than one route in a router’s IPv4 routing table, the router uses the most specific route—in other words, the route with the
longest prefix length mask.
<code>show ip route</code>
<code>show ip route [protocol]</code>
<code>show ip route [address]</code>
