# IP Routing in the LAN
## VLAN Routing with Router 802.1Q Trunks
LAN routing options :
* one router LAN interface and cable connected to the switch for each and every VLAN (typically not used)
* a router, with a VLAN trunk connecting to a LAN switch (known as router-on-astick, or ROAS)
* a Layer 3 switch with switched virtual interfaces (SVI)
* a Layer 3 switch with routed interfaces (which may or may not be Layer 3 EtherChannels)

*Layer 3 switches could use SVIs, routed interfaces, or both.

### Configuring ROAS
The router needs to have an IP address/mask associated with each VLAN on the trunk, with subinterfaces per each VLAN. 
Cisco routers do not attempt to negotiate trunking, so both the router and switch need to manually configure trunking, with the switch command being :  <code> switchport mode trunk</code>

    interface type number.subint
    encapsulation dot1q vlan_id 
    ip address address mask

subinterfaces can be any number from 1 up through a very large number (over 4 billion). The number just needs to be unique among all subinterfaces associated with this one physical interface. In fact, the subinterface number does not even have to match the associated VLAN ID.


two options to define a router interface for the native VLAN: 
* Configure the <code>ip address</code> command on the physical interface, but without an encapsulation command; the router considers this physical interface to be using the native VLAN.
* Configure the <code>ip address</code> command on a subinterface and use the <code>encapsulation dot1q vlan-id native</code> subcommand to tell the router both the VLAN ID and the fact that it is the native VLAN.

### Verifying ROAS
<code>show ip route [connected]</code> and <code>show vlans</code>

! subinterface state cannot be better than the state of the matching physical interface, but the subinterface state can also be enabled and disabled independently from the physical interface, using the no shutdown and shutdown commands in subinterface configuration mode.

### Troubleshooting ROAS
1. Is each non-native VLAN configured on the router with an encapsulation dot1q vlan-id command on a subinterface?
2. Do those same VLANs exist on the trunk on the neighboring switch (show interfaces trunk), and are they in the allowed list, not VTP pruned, and not STP blocked?
3. Does each router ROAS subinterface have an IP address/mask configured per the planned configuration?
4. If using the native VLAN, is it configured correctly on the router either on a subinterface (with an encapsulation dot1q vlan-id native command) or implied on the physical interface?
5. Is the same native VLAN configured on the neighboring switch’s trunk in comparison to the native VLAN configured on the router?
6. Are the router physical or ROAS subinterfaces configured with a shutdown command?

## VLAN Routing with Layer 3 Switch SVIs
In larger LAN, network designers choose to use Layer 3 switches for most inter-VLAN routing.

### Configuring Routing Using Switch SVIs
Layer 3 switching function needs a virtual interface connected to each VLAN internal to the switc, also referred to as switched virtual interfaces [SVI].
Sokemtime the ability to route IPv4 packets must be enabled first, with a reload of the switch required to enable the feature.

* <code>sdm prefer lanbase-routing </code>
* <code>reload</code>
* <code>ip routing</code> command in global configuration mode to enable the IPv4 routing function in IOS software and to enable key com mands like show ip route.
* <code>interface vlan vlan_id</code> command in global configuration mode to create a VLAN interface and to give the switch’s routing logic a Layer 3 interface connected into the VLAN of the same number.
* <code>ip address address mask</code> enabling IPv4 routing on that VLAN interface.
* <code>no shutdown</code> 

### Troubleshooting Routing with SVIs
make sure the switch has been enabled to support IP routing. Second, the VLAN associated with each VLAN interface must be known and active on the local switch;
otherwise, the VLAN interfaces do not come up.

For a VLAN interface to be in an up/up state:
* The VLAN must be defined on the local switch (either explicitly or learned with VTP).
* The switch must have at least one up/up interface using the VLAN, either/both: 
  - An up/up access interface assigned to that VLAN 
  - A trunk interface for which the VLAN is in the allowed list, is STP forwarding, and is not VTP pruned
* The VLAN (not the VLAN interface) must be administratively enabled (that is, not shutdown).
* The VLAN interface (not the VLAN) must be administratively enabled (that is, not shutdown).

## VLAN Routing with Layer 3 Switch Routed Ports
Layer 3 switch configuration can make a physical port act like a router interface instead of a switch interface. To do so, the switch configuration makes that port a routed port. On a routed port, the switch does not perform Layer 2 switching logic on that frame. Instead, frames arriving in a routed port trigger the Layer 3 routing logic, including
1. Stripping off the incoming frame’s Ethernet data-link header/trailer 2. Making a Layer 3 forwarding decision by comparing the destination IP address to the IP routing table
3. Adding a new Ethernet data-link header/trailer to the packet
4. Forwarding the packet, encapsulated in a new frame

Layer 3 EtherChannels also treat multiple links as one link.

### Implementing Routed Interfaces on Switches
Layer 3 interface connected to a subnet, and only one physical interface connects to that subnet, the network engineer can choose to use a routed port instead of an SVI. Conversely, when the Layer 3 switch needs a Layer 3 interface connected to a subnet, and many physical interfaces on the switch connect to that subnet, an SVI needs to be used. (SVIs forward traffic internally into the VLAN, so that then the Layer 2 logic can
forward the frame out any of the ports in the VLAN. Routed ports cannot.)

<code>no switchport</code> subcommand on the physical interface to make the port stop acting like a switch port and instead act like a router port

    ! For any topologies with a point-to-point link between two devices that do routing, a routed interface works well.

### Implementing Layer 3 EtherChannels 
routed interfaces can be used with a single point-to-point link between pairs of Layer 3 switches, or between a Layer 3 switch and a router.

While each individual port in the distribution and core could be treated as a separate routed port, it is better to combine each pair of parallel links into a Layer 3 EtherChannel.

Each switch learns one route per destination per pair of links, and not two. IOS then balances the traffic, often with better balancing than the balancing that occurs with the use of multiple IP routes to the same subnet. Overall, the Layer 3 EtherChannel approach works much better than leaving each link as a separate routed port and using Layer 3 balancing.

1. Configure the physical interfaces as follows, in interface configuration mode: 
   -  Add the channel-group number mode on command to add it to the channel. Use the same number for all physical interfaces on the same switch, but the number used (the channel-group number) can differ on the two neighboring switches.
    - Add the no switchport command to make each physical port a routed port. 
2. Configure the PortChannel interface:
    - Use the interface port-channel number command to move to port-channel configuration mode for the same channel number configured on the physical interfaces.
    - Add the no switchport command to make sure that the port-channel interface acts as a routed port. (IOS may have already added this command.)
    - Use the ip address address mask command to configure the address and mask.

IP address should be placed on the PortChannel interface only. In fact, when the no switchport command is configured on an interface, IOS adds the no ip address command to the interface.

<code>show interfaces status </code> command lists the fact that the physical ports and the port-channel 12 interface are all routed ports.

<code>show etherchannel summary</code>

### Troubleshooting Layer 3 EtherChannels
<code>channel-group</code> interface subcommand, this command can enable EtherChannel statically or dynamically. If dynamic, this command’s keywords imply either Port Aggregation Protocol (PaGP) or Link Aggregation Control Protocol (LACP) as the protocol to negotiate between the neighboring switches whether they put the link into the
EtherChannel.

list of requirements for Layer 3 EtherChannels:
- no switchport: The PortChannel interface must be configured with the no switchport command, and so must the physical interfaces. If a physical interface is not also configured with the no switchport command, it will not become operational in the EtherChannel. 
- Speed: The physical ports in the channel must use the same speed.
- duplex: The physical ports in the channel must use the same duplex.