# Troubleshooting IPv4 Routing
# Problem Isolation Using <code>ping</code>
ping command uses the Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP), specifically the ICMP echo request and ICMP echo reply messages. It functions as part of Layer 3, as a control protocol to assist IP by helping manage the IP network functions.

The command has many options: the name or IP address of the destination, how many times the command should send an echo request, how long the command should wait
(timeout) for an echo reply, how big to make the packets, and many other options.
Cisco IOS ping command sends five echo messages, with a timeout of 2 seconds.

Successful ping confirms that:
* The switch interfaces in use are in a connected (up/up) state.
* Port security  does not filter frames.
* STP has placed the right ports into a forwarding state.

## Problem Isolation Using <code> traceroute </code> 

traceroute command systematically helps pinpoint routing problems by showing how far a packet goes through an IP network before being discarded.

error message is the ICMP Time-to-Live Exceeded (TTL Exceeded) message, originally meant to notify hosts when a
packet had been looping around a network.
IPv4 header holds a field called Time To Live (TTL). The original host that creates the packet sets an initial TTL value. Then each router that forwards the packet decrements the TTL value by 1. When a router decrements the TTL to 0, the router perceives the packet is looping, and the router discards the packet. The router also notifies the host that sent the discarded packet by sending an ICMP TTL Exceeded message.

traceroute command begins by sending several packets (usually three), each with the header TTL field equal to 1. When that packet arrives at the next router, the router decrements TTL to 0 and discards the packet. The router then sends host A the TTL Exceeded message, which identifies the router’s IP address to the traceroute command.
traceroute command sends a small set of packets with TTL=1, then a small set with TTL=2, then 3, 4, and so on, until the destination host replies.

## Telnet and SSH