#  OSPF Concepts

- Routing protocol: A set of messages, rules, and algorithms used by routers for the overall purpose of learning routes. This process includes the exchange and analysis of routing information. Each router chooses the best route to each subnet (path selection) and finally places those best routes in its IP routing table. Examples include RIP, EIGRP, OSPF, and BGP.
- Routed protocol and routable protocol: Both terms refer to a protocol that defines a packet structure and logical addressing, allowing routers to forward or route the packets. Routers forward packets defined by routed and routable protocols. Examples include IP Version 4 (IPv4) and IP Version 6 (IPv6).

Routing Protocol Functions: 
1. Learn routing information about IP subnets from neighboring routers. 
2. Advertise routing information about IP subnets to neighboring routers. 
3. If more than one possible route exists to reach one subnet, pick the best route based on a metric.
4. If the network topology changes—for example, a link fails—react by advertising that some routes have failed and pick a new currently best route. (This process is called convergence.)

### Interior and Exterior Routing Protocols
- IGP: A routing protocol that was designed and intended for use inside a single autonomous system (AS)
- EGP: A routing protocol that was designed and intended for use between different autonomous systems. Today, Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is the only EGP used.

AS is a network under the administrative control of a single organization

### IGP Routing Protocol Algorithms
Routing protocol algorithm simply refers to the logic and processes used by different routing protocols to solve the problem of learning all routes. 

- Distance vector (sometimes called Bellman-Ford after its creators) : RIP, IGRP. Slow convergence and potential for routing loops
- Advanced distance vector (sometimes called “balanced hybrid”)
- Link-state : Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) and Integrated Intermediate System to Intermediate System (IS-IS). Require extra CPU and memory on routers, with more planning required.

### Metrics

|IGP|Metric|Description|
|---|---|---|
|RIPv2|Hop count|The number of routers (hops) between a router and the destination subnet|
|OSPF|Cost|The sum of all interface cost settings for all links in a route, with the cost defaulting to be based on interface bandwidth|
|EIGRP|Calculation based on bandwidth and delay|Calculated based on the route’s slowest link and the cumulative delay associated with each interface in the route|

Classless routing protocols support variablelength subnet masks (VLSM) as well as manual route summarization by sending routing protocol messages that include the subnet masks in the message. The older RIPv1 and IGRP routing protocols—both classful routing protocols—do not.

### Administrative Distance

route redistribution : router can take routes learned by OSPF and advertise them into EIGRP, and vice versa.

Default Administrative Distances :
|Type|Administrative Distance
|--|--|
|Connected|0|
|Static|1|
|BGP (external routes [eBGP])|20|
|EIGRP (internal routes)|90|
|IGRP|100|
|OSPF|110|
|IS-IS|115|
|RIP|120|
|EIGRP (external routes)|170|
|BGP (internal routes [iBGP])|200|
|DHCP default route|254|
|Unusable|255|
<br>

<code>show ip route </code>command lists each route’s administrative distance as the first of the two numbers inside the brackets. The second number in brackets is the metric.

## OSPF Concepts and Operation

Open Shortest Path First (OSPF), organizes topology information using LSAs and the link-state database (LSDB). LSDB is simply the collection of all the LSAs known to a router.

All link-state protocols use the Dijkstra Shortest Path First (SPF) algorithm.

Three main phases of how OSPF routers accomplish the work of exchanging LSAs and calculating
routes: 
- Becoming neighbors: A relationship between two routers that connect to the same data link
- Exchanging databases: The process of sending LSAs to neighbors 
- Adding the best routes: The process of each router independently running SPF, on their local copy of the LSDB, calculating the best routes, and adding those to the IPv4 routing table.

OSPF neighbors are routers that both use OSPF and both sit on the same data link. Two routers can become OSPF neighbors if connected to the same VLAN, or same serial link, or
same Ethernet WAN link.

<code>show ip ospf neighbor</code>

OSPF routers listen for OSPF Hello messages from new routers and react to those messages, attempting to become neighbors and exchange LSDBs.

The Hellos in turn list each router’s router ID (RID).OSPF RIDs are 32-bit numbers. As a result, most command output lists these as dotted-decimal numbers (DDN). By default, IOS chooses one of the router’s interface IPv4 addresses to use as its OSPF RID. However, the OSPF RID can be directly configured.

OSPF routers can become neighbors if they are connected to the same subnet. To discover other OSPF-speaking routers, a router sends multicast
OSPF Hello packets to each interface.


- The Hello message follows the IP packet header, with IP protocol type 89.
- Hello packets are sent to multicast IP address 224.0.0.5, a multicast IP address intended for all OSPF-speaking routers.
- OSPF routers listen for packets sent to IP multicast address 224.0.0.5, in part hoping to receive Hello packets and learn about new neighbors.

### Exchanging the LSDB Between Neighbors
The OSPF neighbor state 2-way means that the router is available to exchange its LSDB with the neighbor. In other words, it is ready to begin a 2-way exchange of the LSDB. So, once two routers on a link reach the 2-way state, they can immediately move on to the process of database exchange. 

They tell each other a list of LSAs in their respective databases—not all the details of the LSAs, just a list. Then ask the other router for only the LSAs that are not known yet.

OSPF messages that actually send the LSAs between neighbors are called Link-State Update (LSU) packets. That is, the LSU packet holds data structures called linkstate advertisements (LSA). The LSAs are not packets, but rather data structures that sit inside the LSDB and describe the topology.

The routers exchange the LSAs inside LSU packets. When finished, the routers reach a full state, meaning they have fully exchanged the contents of their LSDBs.


Routers monitor each neighbor relationship using Hello messages and two related timers: the Hello Interval and the Dead Interval. Routers send Hellos every Hello Interval to each neighbor. Each router expects to receive a Hello from each neighbor based on the Hello Interval, so if a neighbor is silent for the length of the Dead Interval (by default, four times as long as the Hello Interval), the loss of Hellos means that the neighbor has failed. Then the routers must flood the changed LSAs to each neighbor so that the neighbor can change its LSDB.

A third maintenance task done by neighbors is to reflood each LSA occasionally, even when the network is completely stable. By default, each router that creates an LSA also has the responsibility to reflood the LSA every 30 minutes (the default), even if no changes occur.


The following list summarizes these three maintenance tasks : 
- Maintain neighbor state by sending Hello messages based on the Hello Interval and listening for Hellos before the Dead Interval expires
- Flood any changed LSAs to each neighbor
- Reflood unchanged LSAs as their lifetime expires (default 30 minutes)


### Using Designated Routers on Ethernet Links

OSPF behaves differently on some types of interfaces based on a per-interface setting called the OSPF network type. On Ethernet links, OSPF defaults to use a network type of broadcast, which causes OSPF to elect one of the routers on the same subnet to act as the designated router (DR). The DR plays a key role in how the database exchange process works, with different rules than with point-to-point links.

The database exchange process on an Ethernet link does not happen between every pair of routers on the same VLAN/subnet. Instead, it happens between the DR and each of the other routers, with the DR making sure that all the other routers get a copy of each LSA.

OSPF uses the BDR concept because the DR is so important to the database exchange process. The BDR watches the status of the DR and takes over for the DR if it fails. (When the DR fails, the BDR takes over, and then a new BDR is elected.)

The DR can send a packet to all OSPF routers in the subnet by using multicast IP address 224.0.0.5. IANA reserves this address as the “All SPF Routers” multicast address just for this purpose. 

Any OSPF router needing to send a message to the DR and also to the BDR (so it remains ready to take over for the DR) can send those messages to the “All SPF DRs” multicast address 224.0.0.6.

DR and BDR reach a full state with all neighbors. However, routers that are neither a DR nor a BDR— called DROthers by OSPF—never reach a full state because they do not exchange LSDBs directly with each other. As a result, the <code>show ip ospf neighbor </code>command on these DROther
routers lists some neighbors in a 2-way state, remaining in that state under normal operation as below: 
- Two neighbors (the DR and BDR, respectively) with a full state (called fully adjacent neighbors)
- Other neighbors ( which are DROthers) with a 2-way state (called neighbors)

|Neighbour State|Neighbour Term|Relationship term|
|---|---|---|
|2-way|Neighbour|Neighbour Relationship|
|Full|Adjacent Neighbour, Fully Adjacent Neighbour|Adjacency|

<br>

### SPF BEST Route Calculation
If more than one route exists, the router compares the metrics, picking the best (lowest) metric route to add to the routing table.

OSPF calculates the metric for a route as the sum of the OSPF interface costs for all outgoing interfaces in the route.

OSPF considers the costs of the outgoing interfaces (only) in each route. It does not add the cost for incoming interfaces in the route.

## OSPF Areas and LSAs
Problems with a single area design : 
- A larger topology database requires more memory on each router. 
- The SPF algorithm requires processing power that grows exponentially compared to the size of the topology database.
- A single interface status change anywhere in the internetwork (up to down, or down to up) forces every router to run SPF again!

Break large LSDB into several smaller LSDBs by using OSPF areas.

Networks larger than a few dozen routers benefit from areas, and some documents over the years have listed 50 routers as the dividing line at which a network really should use multiple OSPF areas.


- Put all interfaces connected to the same subnet inside the same area. 
- An area should be contiguous. 
- Some routers may be internal to an area, with all interfaces assigned to that single area. 
- Some routers may be Area Border Routers (ABR) because some interfaces connect to the backbone area, and some connect to nonbackbone areas.
- All nonbackbone areas must have a path to reach the backbone area (area 0) by having atleast one ABR connected to both the backbone area and the nonbackbone area.

OSPF Design Terminology:
|Term|Description|
|--|--|
|Area Border Router (ABR)|An OSPF router with interfaces connected to the backbone area and to at least one other area|
|Backbone router|A router connected to the backbone area (includes ABRs)|
|Internal router|A router in one area (not the backbone area)|
|Area|A set of routers and links that shares the same detailed LSDB information, but not with routers in other areas, for better efficiency|
|Backbone area|A special OSPF area to which all other areas must connect—area 0|
|Intra-area route|A route to a subnet inside the same area as the router|
|Interarea route|A route to a subnet in an area of which the router is not a part|


OSPFv2 uses very brief summary information about the subnets in other areas. These summary LSAs do not include topology information about the other areas; however, each summary LSA does list a subnet ID and mask of a subnet in some other area. Summary LSAs do not require much SPF processing at all. Instead, these subnets all appear like subnets connected to the ABR.


- Routers require fewer CPU cycles to process the smaller per-area LSDB with the SPF algorithm, reducing CPU overhead and improving convergence time.
- The smaller per-area LSDB requires less memory. 
- Changes in the network (for example, links failing and recovering) require SPF calculations only on routers in the area where the link changed state, reducing the number of routers that must rerun SPF.
- Less information must be advertised between areas, reducing the bandwidth required to send LSAs.

### (OSPFv2) Link-State Advertisements
<code> show ip ospf database</code> : list a summary of the LSDB’s contents

Three OSPFv2 LSA Types Seen with a Multiarea OSPF Design :
|LSA Name|LSA Type|Primary Purpose|Content of LSA|
|--|--|--|--|
|Router|1|Describe a router|RID, interfaces, IP address/mask, current interface state (status)|
|Network|2|Describe a network that has a DR|Describe a network that has a DR|
|Summary|3|Describe a subnet in another area|Subnet ID, mask, RID of ABR that advertises the LSA|


The routers inside area X need to know all the details about the topology inside area X. And the mechanism to give routers all these details is for the routers to create and flood router (Type 1) and network (Type 2) LSAs about the routers and links in the area.

Each router creates a router LSA for itself, with its own RID as the LSA identifier. The LSA lists that router’s own interfaces, IP address/mask, with pointers to neighbors.

Whereas router LSAs define most of the intra-area topology, network LSAs define the rest. As it turns out, when OSPF elects a DR on some subnet and that DR has at least one neighbor, OSPF treats that subnet as another node in its mathematical model of the network. 