# Implementing OSPF
## Implementing Single-Area OSPFv2
Enable OSPF on each router interface and placing that interface in the correct OSPF area. 

1. Use the <code>router ospf process-id</code> global command to enter OSPF configuration mode for a particular OSPF process.
2. (Optional) Configure the OSPF router ID by doing the following:
    - Use the <code>router-id id-value</code> router subcommand to define the router ID, or
    -  Use the interface loopback number global command, along with an <code>ip address address mask</code> command, to configure an IP address on a loopback interface (chooses the highest IP address of all working loopbacks), or
    - Rely on an interface IP address (chooses the highest IP address of all working nonloopbacks).
3. Use one or more <code>network ip-address wildcard-mask area area-id</code> router subcommands to enable OSPFv2 on any interfaces matched by the configured address and mask, enabling OSPF on the interface for the listed area.

The process-id number just needs to be unique on the local router, allowing the router to support multiple OSPF processes in a single router by using different process IDs. It does not have to match on each router, and it can be any integer between 1 and 65,535.

    IOS will change a typed command that begins with network 1.2.3.4 0.0.255.255 to network 1.2.0.0 0.0.255.255.

### Verifying OSPF Operation

The </code>show ip ospf neighbor</code>, </code>show ip ospf database</code>, and </code>show ip route</code> commands display information to match each of these three steps, respectively.

    FULL/ -: The neighbor state is full, with the “-“ instead of letters meaning that the link does not use a DR/BDR.

    FULL/DROTHER: The neighbor state is full, and the neighbor is neither the DR nor BDR. (It also implies that the local router is a DR or BDR because the state is FULL.)

 LSDB should list one “Router Link State” (Type 1 Router LSA) for each of the routers in the same area

 ### Verifying OSPF Configuration

- If you have enable mode access, use the show running-config command to examine the configuration.
- If you have only user mode access, use the show ip protocols command to re-create the OSPF configuration.
- Use the show ip ospf interface [brief] command to determine whether the router enabled OSPF on the correct interfaces or not based on the configuration.

### Configuring the OSPF Router ID

1. If the router-id rid OSPF subcommand is configured, this value is used as the RID. 
2. If any loopback interfaces have an IP address configured, and the interface has an interface status of up, the router picks the highest numeric IP address among these loopback interfaces.
3. The router picks the highest numeric IP address from all other interfaces whose interface status code (first status code) is up. (In other words, an interface in up/down state will be included by OSPF when choosing its router ID.)

A loopback interface is a virtual interface that can be configured with the <code>interface loopback interface-number </code> command, where interface-number is an integer. Loopback interfaces are always in an “up and up” state unless administratively placed in a shutdown state.

Each router chooses its OSPF RID when OSPF is initialized, which happens when the router boots or when a CLI user stops and restarts the OSPF process (with the <code>clear ip ospf process</code> command)

## OSPFv2 Interface Subcommands

Newer interface-style OSPF configuration still enables OSPF on interfaces, but it does so directly with the <code>ip ospf process-id area area-id</code> interface subcommand instead of using the network command in router configuration mode. 

Use the <code>no network network-id area area-id</code> subcommands in OSPF configuration mode to remove the network commands.

With the newer-style configuration, <code>show ip protocols</code> lists the phrase “Interfaces Configured Explicitly,” with the list of interfaces configured with the new ip ospf process-id area area-id commands.

## Additional OSPFv2 Features

- Passive interfaces 
- Default routes 
- Metrics
- Load balancing

### OSPF Passive Interfaces

Often, no other routers exist on a particular link, so the router has no need to keep sending those repetitive OSPF Hello messages. In such cases, an engineer can make the inter-
face passive :

- OSPF continues to advertise about the subnet that is connected to the interface. 
- OSPF no longer sends OSPF Hellos on the interface.
- OSPF no longer processes any received Hellos on the interface.

To configure an interface as passive, two options exist. First, you can add the following command to the configuration of the OSPF process, in router configuration mode:

<code>passive-interface type number</code>

Alternately, the configuration can change the default setting so that all interfaces are passive by default and then add a no passive-interface command for all interfaces that need to not be passive:

<code>passive-interface default</code>

<code>no passive-interface type number</code>
<br>

<code>show ip ospf interface brief</code> command lists all interfaces on which OSPF is enabled, including passive interfaces. 

<code>show ip ospf interface</code> command lists a single line that mentions that the interface is passive.

### OSPF Default Routes
- All routers learn specific (nondefault) routes for subnets inside the company; a default route is not needed when forwarding packets to these destinations.
- One router connects to the Internet, and it has a default route that points toward the Internet.
- All routers should dynamically learn a default route, used for all traffic going to the Internet, so that all packets destined to locations in the Internet go to the one router connected to the Internet.

static default route (destination 0.0.0.0, mask 0.0.0.0) with a next-hop address of the ISP router. Then the use of the OSPF <code>default-information originate</code> command makes the router advertise a default route using OSPF to the remote routers 

A default route can be either defined as a static default route, learned from the ISP with DHCP or learned from the ISP with a routing protocol like eBGP.

<code>default-information originate always</code> router subcommand tells the router to always advertise the default route, no matter whether the router’s default route is working or not.

### OSPF Metrics (Cost)
OSPF routers can influence that choice by changing the OSPF interface cost 

- Directly, using the interface subcommand <code>ip ospf cost x</code>. 
- Using the default calculation per interface, and changing the interface bandwidth setting, which changes the calculated value.
- Using the default calculation per interface, and changing the OSPF reference bandwidth
setting, which changes the calculated value.

#### Setting the Cost Based on Interface and Reference Bandwidth

Routers use a per-interface bandwidth setting to describe the speed of the interface. Note that the interface bandwidth setting does not influence the actual transmission speed. To support this logic, IOS sets a default interface bandwidth value that matches the physical transmission speed when possible, but also allows the configuration of the interface bandwidth using <code>bandwidth speed</code> interface subcommand.

IOS uses the following formula to choose an interface’s OSPF cost if the cost for cases in which the ip ospf cost command is not configured on the interface :

    Reference_bandwidth / Interface_bandwidth

Several IOS features make use of the bandwidth setting, you should avoid changing the interface bandwidth as a means to influence the default OSPF cost.

Any interface with an interface bandwidth of 100 Mbps or faster ties with a calculated OSPF cost of 1 when using the default reference bandwidth. So, when relying on the default OSPF cost calculation, it helps to configure the reference bandwidth to another value.

<code>auto-cost reference-bandwidth speed </code> OSPF mode subcommand sets a value in a unit of megabits per second (Mbps). Set the reference bandwidth value to a value at least as much as the fastest link speed in the network, but preferably higher, in anticipation of adding even faster links in the future.

For instance, in that same enterprise, whose fastest link is 10 Gbps, set the reference bandwidth to 40 Gbps or even 100 Gbps to be ready for future upgrades to use 40-Gbps links, or even 100-Gbps links.
(For example, use the <code>auto-cost reference-bandwidth 100000</code>). That causes 100-Gbps links to have an OSPF cost of 1, 40-Gbps links to have a cost of 4, 10-Gbps links to have a cost of 10, and 1-Gbps links to have a cost of 100.


Summary of the rules for how a router sets its OSPF interface costs:
1. Set the cost explicitly, using the ip ospf cost x interface subcommand, to a value between 1 and 65,535, inclusive.
2. Although it should be avoided, change the interface bandwidth with the bandwidth speed command, with speed being a number in kilobits per second (Kbps).
3. Change the reference bandwidth, using router OSPF subcommand auto-cost reference-bandwidth ref-bw, with a unit of megabits per second (Mbps).

### OSPF Load Balancing

When the metrics tie for multiple routes to the same subnet, the router can put multiple equal-cost routes in the routing table (the default is four different routes) based on the setting of the <code>maximum-paths number </code> router subcommand.

A router could load balance the packets on a per-packet basis.

Note that perpacket load balancing is generally a poor choice because it causes the most overhead work on the router. Alternatively, using the default (and better) method, the load balancing could be on a per-destination IP address basis.

Note that the default setting of maximum-paths varies by router platform.