# OSPF Network Types and Neighbors
## OSPF Network Types


### OSPF Broadcast Network Type
OSPF defaults to use a broadcast network type on all types of Ethernet interfaces.

Both interfaces on each router use the broadcast network type and perform the following actions:
- Attempt to discover neighbors by sending OSPF Hellos to the 224.0.0.5 multicast address (an address reserved for sending packets to all OSPF routers in the subnet)
- Attempt to elect a DR and BDR on each subnet 
- On the interface with no other routers on the subnet (G0/1), become the DR 
- On the interface with three other routers on the subnet (G0/0), be either DR, BDR, or a DROther router
- When sending OSPF messages to the DR or BDR, send the messages to the all-OSPF-DRs multicast address 224.0.0.6

All discovered routers on the link should become neighbors and at least reach the 2-way state. For all neighbor relationships that include the DR and/or BDR, the neighbor relationship should further reach the full state. That section defined the
term fully adjacent as a special term that refers to neighbors that reach this full state.

DROther routers wait ready to become the BDR if either the DR or BDR fails; their neighbor relationship remains in a 2-way state.

Although you would not need to configure an Ethernet interface to use the broadcast network type, some older types of interfaces over the years have used different defaults and with the option to use the broadcast network type. In those cases, the <code>ip ospf network broadcast</code> interface subcommand would configure the setting.

#### Configuring to Influence the DR/BDR Election 
OSPF DR/BDR election rules will not result in a specific router always being the DR, and another always being the BDR.

Rules once a DR and BDR have been elected:
- If the DR fails, the BDR becomes the DR, and a new BDR is elected. 
- When a better router enters the subnet, no preemption of the existing DR or BDR occurs.

You can configure a router to be the best (highest priority) router to become the DR in an election, doing so only increases that router’s statistical chances of being the DR at a given point in time. If the router fails, other routers will become DR and BDR, and the best router will not be DR again until the current DR and BDR fail.

<br>

    STP uses a lowest-is-best approach and allows new switches to preempt the existing root switch to become the root. OSPF uses a highest-is-best approach and does not preempt the DR as just noted.

- The highest OSPF interface priority: The highest value wins during an election, with values ranging from 0 to 255.
- The highest OSPF Router ID: If the priority ties, the election chooses the router with the
highest OSPF RID.

### The OSPF Point-to-Point Network Type
Point-to-point, works well for data links that by their nature have just two routers on the link.

Data-link protocols most often used on the link (HDLC and PPP)  that do not support data-link broadcasts. With only two devices on the link, using a DR/BDR is not a help, and it actually adds a little extra convergence time. Itis preferred to instead use an OSPF point-topoint network type on Ethernet WAN links that in effect act as a point-to-point link.

    All the Ethernet WAN links used in this book happen to use a point-to-point Ethernet WAN service called an Ethernet Private Wire Service or simply an Ethernet Line (E-Line).

R1(config)# <code>interface g0/0/0 </code>

R1(config-if)# <code>ip ospf network point-to-point</code>

When using Ethernet WAN links that behave as a point-to-point link, consider using OSPF network type point-to-point rather than using the default broadcast type.

## OSPF Neighbor Relationships
Once discovered, two routers may not become neighbors. They must have compatible values for several settings as listed in the Hellos exchanged between the two routers.

Neighbor Requirements for OSPF: 

|Requirement|Required for OSPF|Neighbor Missing if Incorrect|
|---|---|---|
|Interfaces must be in an up/up state.|Yes|Yes|
|Access control lists (ACL) must not filter routing protocol messages.|Yes|Yes|
|Interfaces must be in the same subnet.|Yes|Yes|
|They must pass routing protocol neighbor authentication (if configured).|Yes|Yes|
|Hello and hold/dead timers must match.|Yes|Yes|
|Router IDs (RID) must be unique.|Yes|Yes|
|They must be in the same area.|Yes|Yes|
|OSPF process must not be shut down.|Yes|Yes|
|Neighboring interfaces must use same MTU setting.|Yes|Yes|
|Neighboring interfaces must use same OSPF network type.|Yes|Yes|

<br>

for these two items, when incorrect, a router can list the other router as a neighbor, but the neighbor relationship does not work properly in that the routers do not exchange
LSAs as they should.


OSPF Neighbor Requirements and the Best show/debug Commands:
|Requirement|Show commands|
|---|---|
|Hello and dead timers must match.|show ip ospf interface|
|They must be in the same area.|show ip ospf interface brief|
|RIDs must be unique.|show ip ospf|
|They must pass any neighbor authentication.|show ip ospf interface|
|OSPF process must not be shut down.|show ip ospf, show ip ospf interface|

    Neighboring routers can use the same process ID values, or different process ID values, with no impact on whether two routers become OSPF neighbors.

#### inding OSPF Hello and Dead Timer Mismatches

- Hello interval/timer: The per-interface timer that tells a router how often to send OSPF Hello messages on an interface.
- Dead interval/timer: The per-interface timer that tells the router how long to wait without having received a Hello from a neighbor before believing that neighbor has failed. (Defaults to four times the Hello timer.)

<code># show ip ospf interface Gi0/0</code>

#### Shutting Down the OSPF Process

- Brings down all neighbor relationships and clears the OSPF neighbor table 
- Clears the LSDB
- Clears the IP routing table of any OSPF-learned routes

### Issues That Allow Adjacencies but Prevent IP Routes

<code>show ip ospf neighbor </code>command does list a neighbor, but some other problem exists that prevents the eventual addition of OSPF routes to the routing table. The two issues: a mismatched MTU
setting and a mismatched OSPF network type.

#### Mismatched MTU Settings
The MTU size defines a per-interface setting used by the router for its Layer 3 forwarding logic, defining the largest network layer packet that the router will forward out each interface. 

Routers often use a default MTU size of 1500 bytes, with the ability to set the value as well. The <code>ip mtu size</code> interface subcommand defines the IPv4 MTU setting, and the <code>ipv6 mtu size</code> command sets the equivalent for IPv6 packets.

In an odd twist, two OSPFv2 routers can actually become OSPF neighbors, be listed in the output of the show ip ospf neighbor command, and reach 2-way state, even if they happen to use different IPv4 MTU settings on their interfaces. However, they fail to exchange their LSDBs. Eventually, after trying and failing to exchange their LSDBs, the neighbor relationship also fails. So also keep a watch for MTU mismatches, although they may be unusual and obscure, by looking at the running-config and by using the <code>show interfaces</code> command (which lists the IP MTU).

#### Mismatched OSPF Network Types

OSPF broadcast network type, which uses a DR/BDR, and the OSPF point-to-point network type, which does not. Interestingly, if you misconfigure network type settings: 
- The two routers become fully adjacent neighbors (that is, they reach a full state). 
- They exchange their LSDBs.
- They do not add IP routes to the IP routing table.

The two routers expect different details in the LSAs, and the SPF algorithm notices those differences and cannot trust the LSAs because of those differences.

The router with network type point-to-point, does not list a DR or BDR role in the output, while the other one with a broadcast network type does, which is one clue for this type of problem. The other comes with noticing that the expected routes are not in the IP routing table.
