# IPv6 Addressing and Subnetting
## Global Unicast Addressing Concepts

IPv6 allows two similar options of public and private unicast addressing, beginning with <b>global unicast</b> addresses as the public IPv6 address space and <b>unique local</b> IPv6 addresses, which work more like the IPv4 private addresses.

- Global unicast: Addresses that work like public IPv4 addresses. The organization that needs IPv6 addresses asks for a registered IPv6 address block, which is assigned as a global routing prefix. After that, only that organization uses the addresses inside that block of addresses—that is, the addresses that begin with the assigned prefix. 
- Unique local: Works somewhat like private IPv4 addresses, with the possibility that multiple organizations use the exact same addresses, and with no requirement for registering with any numbering authority.

###  IPv6 Global Routing Prefix
That reserved block of IPv6 addresses—a set of addresses that only one company can use— is called a global routing prefix.

Both the IPv6 and IPv4 address assignment processes rely on the same organizations: IANA (along with ICANN), the Regional Internet Registries (RIR), and ISPs.

Originally, IANA reserved all IPv6 addresses that begin with hex 2 or 3 as global unicast addresses. (This address range can be written succinctly as prefix 2000::/3.) 

Later IANA made the global unicast address range wider, basically to include all IPv6 addresses not otherwise allocated for other purposes. For example, the unique local unicast addresses, discussed later in this chapter, all start with hex FD. So, while global unicast addresses would not include any addresses that begin with FD, any address ranges that are not specifically reserved, for now, are considered to be global unicast addresses.

Some Types of IPv6 Addresses and Their First Hex Digit(s):
|Address Type|First Hex Digits|
|||
|Global unicast|2 or 3 (originally); all not otherwise reserved (today)|
|Unique local|FD|
|Multicast|FF|
|Link local|FE80|

IPv6 and IPv4 both use the same concepts about where a subnet is needed: one for each VLAN and one for each point-to-point WAN connection (serial and Ethernet). 

    Note that the prefix length of the global routing prefix is often between /32 and /48, or possibly as long as /56. Using a 64-bit interface ID field works well in real networks, and there are no reasons to avoid using a 64-bit interface ID field.

Example : 
- The company was assigned prefix 2001:0DB8:1111, with prefix length /48. 
- The company uses the usual 64-bit interface ID.
- The company has a subnet field of 16 bits, allowing for 2^16 IPv6 subnets.

The /64 prefix length for all subnets makes the math simple because it cuts the 128-bit IPv6 address in half.

### Assigning Addresses to Hosts in a Subnet

Addresses can be <b>configured statically</b>, along with the prefix length, default router, and Domain Name System (DNS) IPv6 addresses. Alternatively, hosts can learn these same settings dynamically, using either <b>Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP)</b> or a built-in IPv6 mechanism
called <b>Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (SLAAC)</b>.

## Unique Local Unicast Addresses

- Use FD as the first two hex digits. 
- Choose a unique 40-bit global ID. 
- Append the global ID to FD to create a 48-bit prefix, used as the prefix for all your addresses.
- Use the next 16 bits as a subnet field.
- Note that the structure leaves a convenient 64-bit interface ID field.

     IANA actually reserves prefix FC00::/7, and not FD00::/8, for these addresses. FC00::/7 includes all addresses that begin with hex FC and FD. However, an RFC (4193) requires the eighth bit of these addresses to be set to 1, which means that in practice today, the unique local addresses all begin with their first two digits as FD.

With unique local, you create that prefix locally, and the prefix begins with /48, with the first 8 bits set and the next 40 bits randomly chosen.

RFC 4193 defines unique local addresses, and that RFC stresses the importance of choosing your global ID in a way to make it statistically unlikely to be used by other companies. 

Today, with IPv4, a high percentage of companies use private IPv4 network 10.0.0.0. When they merge their networks, the fact that both use network 10.0.0.0 makes the network merger more painful than if the companies had used different private IPv4 networks.