# Fundamentals of Wireless Networks
## Wireless LAN Topologies
IEEE 802.11 WLANs are always half duplex because transmissions between stations use the same frequency or channel.  To achieve full-duplex mode, one station’s transmission would have to occur on one frequency while it receives over a different frequency—much like full-duplex Ethernet links work. Although this is certainly possible and practical, the 802.11 standarddoes not permit full-duplex operation

### Basic Service Set
Before a device can participate, it must advertise its capabilities and then be granted permission to join. The 802.11 standard calls this a <b>basic service set (BSS)</b>. At the heart of every BSS is a <b>wireless access point (AP)</b>. The AP operates in infrastructure mode, which means it offers the services that are necessary to form the infrastructure of a wireless network. The AP also establishes its BSS over a single wireless channel. The AP and the members of the BSS must all use the same channel to communicate properly.
Because the operation of a BSS hinges on the AP, the BSS is bounded by the area where the AP’s signal is usable. This is known as the <b>basic service area (BSA)</b> or cell.

The AP serves as a single point of contact for every device that wants to use the BSS. It advertises the existence of the BSS so that devices can find it and try to join. To do that, the AP uses a unique <b>BSS identifier (BSSID)</b> that is based on the AP’s own radio MAC address.

AP advertises the wireless network with a <b>Service Set Identifier (SSID)</b>, which is a text string containing a logical name.
Membership with the BSS is called an <i>association</i> Once associated, a device becomes a client, or an 802.11 station (STA), of the BSS.

    ! frames are freely available over the air to anyone that is within range to receive them

### Distribution System
AP can also uplink into an Ethernet network because it has both wireless and wired capabilities. The 802.11 standard refers to the upstream wired Ethernet as the
distribution system (DS) for the wireless BSS. AP is in charge of mapping a virtual local-area network (VLAN) to an SSID.

AP uses the 802.1Q tag to map the VLAN numbers to the appropriate SSIDs. When an AP uses multiple SSIDs, it is trunking VLANs over the air, and over the same channel, to wireless clients. The AP then appears as multiple logical APs—one per BSS—with a unique BSSID for each. With Cisco APs, this is usually accomplished by incrementing the last digit of the radio’s MAC address for each SSID.

    Even though wireless clients can be distributed across many SSIDs, all of those clients must share the same AP’s hardware and must contend for airtime on the same channel.

### Extended Service Set
When APs are placed at different geographic locations, they can all be interconnected by a switched infrastructure. The 802.11 standard calls this an extended service set (ESS). Any SSIDs that are defined on one AP should be defined on all the APs in an ESS. Regardless of a client’s location within the ESS, the SSID will remain the same but the client can always distinguish one AP from another.

Passing from one AP to another is called <b>roaming</b>. Keep in mind that each AP offers its own BSS on its own channel, to prevent interference between the APs. As a client device roams from one AP to another, it must scan the available channels to find a new AP (and BSS) to roam toward. In effect, the client is roaming from BSS to BSS, and from channel to channel.

### Independent Basic Service Set
A wireless network leverages APs for organization, control, and scalability.

The 802.11 standard allows two or more wireless clients to communicate directly with each other, with no other means of network connectivity, known as an ad hoc wireless network, or an independent basic service set (IBSS). IBSSs are meant to be organized in an impromptu, distributed fashion; therefore, they do not scale well beyond eight to ten devices.

## Other Wireless Topologies
### Repeater
Additional AP that is configured for repeater mode. A wireless repeater takes the signal it receives and repeats or retransmits it in a new cell area around the repeater. 

If the repeater has a single transmitter and receiver, it must operate on the same channel that the AP is using. That can create the possibility that the AP’s signal will be received and retransmitted by the repeater, only to be received again by the AP—halving the effective throughput because the channel will be kept busy twice as long as before. As a remedy, some repeaters can use two transmitters and receivers to keep the original and repeated signals isolated on different channels.

### Workgroup BridgeWorkgroup Bridge
Suppose you have a device that supports a wired Ethernet link but is not capable of having a wireless connection. You can use a workgroup bridge (WGB) to connect the device’s wired network adapter to a wireless network. The WGB acts as an external wireless network adapter for a device that has none.

You might encounter two types of workgroup bridges: 
- Universal workgroup bridge (uWGB): A single wired device can be bridged to a wireless network.
- Workgroup bridge (WGB): A Cisco-proprietary implementation that allows multiple wired devices to be bridged to a wireless network.

### Outdoor Bridge
AP can be configured to act as a bridge to form a single wireless link from one LAN to another over a long distance. Outdoor bridged links are commonly used for connectivity between buildings or between cities.

If the LANs at two locations need to be bridged, a point-to-point bridged link can be used. One AP configured in bridge mode is needed on each end of the wireless link. Special purpose antennas are normally used with the bridges to focus their signals in one direction, toward the antenna of the AP at the far end of the link. This maximizes the link distance. 

A point-to-multipoint bridged link allows a central site to be bridged to several other sites. The central site bridge is connected to an omnidirectional antenna, such that its signal is transmitted equally in all directions so that it can reach the other sites simultaneously. The bridges at each of the other sites can be connected to a directional antenna aimed at the central site.

### Mesh Network
In a mesh topology, wireless traffic is bridged from AP to AP, in a daisy-chain fashion, using another wireless channel.
Mesh APs can leverage dual radios—one using a channel in one range of frequencies and one a different range. Each mesh AP usually maintains a BSS on one channel, with which wireless clients can associate. Client traffic is then usually bridged from AP to AP over other channels as a backhaul network. At the edge of the mesh network, the backhaul traffic is
bridged to the wired LAN infrastructure.

With Cisco APs, you can build a mesh network indoors or outdoors. The mesh network runs its own dynamic routing protocol to work out the best path for backhaul traffic to take across
the mesh APs.

## RF Overview

In free space the sender (a transmitter) can send an alternating current into a section of wire (an antenna), which sets up moving electric and magnetic fields that propagate out and away as traveling waves. The electric and magnetic fields travel along together and are always at right angles to each other.

Electromagnetic waves do not travel in a straight line. Instead, they travel by expanding in all directions away from the antenna.

The electromagnetic waves involved in a wireless link can be measured and described in several ways. One fundamental property is the frequency of the wave, or the number of times the signal makes one complete up and down cycle in 1 second. A hertz (Hz) is the most commonly used frequency unit and is nothing other than one cycle per second.

The frequency range from around 3 kHz to 300 GHz is commonly called radio frequency (RF). It includes many different types of radio communication, including low-frequency radio, AM radio, shortwave radio, television, FM radio, microwave, and radar. The microwave category also contains the two main frequency ranges that are used for wireless LAN communication: 2.4 and 5 GHz.

### Wireless Bands and Channels
Because a range of frequencies might be used for the same purpose, it is customary to refer to the range as a band of frequencies.

One of the two main frequency ranges used for wireless LAN communication lies between 2.400 and 2.4835 GHz. This is usually called the 2.4-GHz band.

The other wireless LAN range is usually called the 5-GHz band because it lies between 5.150 and 5.825 GHz. The 5-GHz band actually contains the following four separate and distinct bands:
- 5.150 to 5.250 GHz 
- 5.250 to 5.350 GHz 
- 5.470 to 5.725 GHz
- 5.725 to 5.825 GHz

<br>

    Efforts are also underway to add 5.825 through 5.925 GHz.

A frequency band contains a continuous range of frequencies. Bands are usually divided into a number of distinct channels. Each channel is known by a channel number and is assigned to a specific frequency.

    5-GHz band consists of nonoverlapping channels.

### APs and Wireless Standards

|Amendment |2.4 GHz|5 GHz|Max Data Rates|Notes|
|--|--|--|--|--|
|802.11-1997|Yes|No|2 Mbps|The original 802.11 standard ratified in 1997|
|802.11b|Yes|No|11 Mbps|Introduced in 1999|
|802.11g|Yes|No|54 Mbps|Introduced in 2003|
|802.11a|No|Yes|54 Mbps|Introduced in 1999|
|802.11n|Yes|Yes|600 Mbps|HT (high throughput), introduced in 2009|
|802.11ac|No|Yes|6.93 Gbps|VHT (very high throughput), introduced in 2013|
|802.11ax|Yes|Yes|4x 802.11ac|High Efficiency Wireless, Wi-Fi6; expected late 2019; will operate on other bands too, as they become available|

Wireless client devices and APs can be compatible with one or more amendments; however, a client and an AP can communicate only if they both support and agree to use the same amendment.

The band used to connect to an AP is chosen according to the operating system, wireless adapter driver, and other internal configuration. A wireless client can initiate an association with an AP on one band and then switch to the other band if the signal conditions are better there.


    Cisco APs have dual radios (sets of transmitters and receivers) to support BSSs on one 2.4-GHz channel and other BSSs on one 5-GHz channel simultaneously. Some models also have two 5-GHz radios that can be configured to operate BSSs on two different channels at the same time, providing wireless coverage to higher densities of users that are located in the same vicinity.

In open space, RF signals propagate or reach further on the 2.4-GHz band than on the 5-GHz band. They also tend to penetrate indoor walls and objects easier at 2.4 GHz than 5 GHz. However, the 2.4-GHz band is commonly more crowded with wireless devices. Remember that only three nonoverlapping channels are available, so the chances of other neighboring APs using the same channels is greater. In contrast, the 5-GHz band has many more channels
available to use, making channels less crowded and experiencing less interference.