# Analyzing Cisco Wireless Architectures
## Autonomous AP Architecture
An autonomous AP is self-contained; it is equipped with both wired and wireless hardware so that the wireless client associations can be terminated onto a wired connection locally at the AP. The APs and their data connections must be distributed across the coverage area and across the network.


Autonomous APs offer one or more fully functional, standalone basic service sets (BSSs). They are also a natural extension of a switched network, connecting wireless service set identifiers (SSIDs) to wired virtual LANs (VLANs) at the access layer.

VLANs must be trunked from the distribution layer switch (where routing commonly takes place) to the access layer, where they are extended further over a trunk link to the AP. The management address is not normally part of any of the data VLANs, so a dedicated management VLAN (i.e., VLAN 10) must be added to the trunk links to reach the AP. You might also want to extend the corresponding VLAN (and IP subnet) to each and every AP so that clients do not have to request a new IP address for each new association.

Client roaming across autonomous APs is typically limited to the Layer 2 domain, or the extent of a single VLAN.

## Cloud-based AP Architecture
AP management function is pushed out of the enterprise and into the Internet cloud. Cisco Meraki is cloud-based and offers centralized management of wireless, switched, and security networks built from
Meraki products. 

APs in a cloud-based network are all autonomous, too. The most visible difference is that all of the APs are managed, controlled, and monitored centrally from the cloud.

From the cloud, you can push out code upgrades and configuration changes to the APs in the enterprise. The Cisco Meraki cloud also adds the intelligence needed to automatically instruct each AP on which channel and transmit power level to use. It can also collect information from all of the APs about things such as RF interference, rogue or unexpected wire- less devices that were overheard, and wireless usage statistics.

- A control plane: Traffic used to control, configure, manage, and monitor the AP itself 
- A data plane: End-user traffic passing through the AP

## Split-MAC Architectures
In autonomous AP you are in charge of selecting and configuring the channel used by each AP and detecting and dealing with any rogue APs that might be interfering. You must also manage things such as the transmit power level to make sure that the wireless coverage is sufficient, it does not overlap too much, and there aren’t any coverage holes—even when an AP’s radio fails.

Managing wireless network security can also be difficult. Each autonomous AP handles its own security policies, with no central point of entry between the wireless and wired networks. 

Many of the functions found within autonomous APs have to be shifted toward some central location.

Most of the activities performed by an autonomous AP on the left are broken up into two groups—management functions and real-time processes.

<b>Management Functions </b>
- RF Management 
- Association and Roaming Management 
- Client Authentication 
- Security Management
- QoS

<b>Real-Time Functions</b>
- RF Transmit/Receive 
- MAC Management
- Encryption

The real-time processes involve sending and receiving 802.11 frames, beacons, and probe messages. 802.11 data encryption is also handled in real time, on a per-packet basis. The AP must interact with wireless clients on some low level, known as the Media Access Control (MAC) layer. These functions must stay with the AP hardware, closest to the clients.

The management functions are not integral to handling frames over the RF channels, but are things that should be centrally administered.

When the functions of an autonomous AP are divided, the AP hardware is known as a lightweight access point, and performs only the real-time 802.11 operation

The management functions are usually performed on a wireless LAN controller (WLC), which controls many lightweight APs.

The AP becomes totally dependent on the WLC for every other WLAN function, such as authenticating users, managing security policies, and even selecting RF channels and output power.

    A lightweight AP cannot normally operate on its own;

The lightweight AP-WLC division of labor is known as a <b>split-MAC architecture</b>

The two devices must use a tunneling protocol between them, to carry 802.11-related messages and also client data. Remember that the AP and WLC can be located on the same VLAN or IP subnet, but they do not have to be. Instead, they can be located on two entirely different IP subnets in two entirely different locations.

Control and Provisioning of Wireless Access Points (CAPWAP) tunneling protocol makes this all possible by encapsulating the data between the LAP and WLC within new IP packets. The tunneled data can then be switched or routed across the campus network.

CAPWAP relationship actually consists of two separate tunnels:
- CAPWAP control messages: Carries exchanges that are used to configure the AP and manage its operation. The control messages are authenticated and encrypted, so the AP is securely controlled by only the appropriate WLC, then transported over the control tunnel.
- CAPWAP data: Used for packets traveling to and from wireless clients that are associated with the AP. Data packets are transported over the data tunnel but are not encrypted by default. When data encryption is enabled for an AP, packets are protected with Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS).

    CAPWAP is based on the Lightweight Access Point Protocol (LWAPP), which was a legacy Cisco proprietary solution.

Every AP and WLC must also authenticate each other with digital certificates. An X.509 certificate is preinstalled in each device when it is purchased.

The CAPWAP tunneling allows the AP and WLC to be separated geographically and logically. It also breaks the dependence on Layer 2 connectivity between them.

Because the AP sits on the access layer where its CAPWAP tunnels terminate, it can use one IP address for both management and tunneling. No trunk link is needed because all of the VLANs it supports are encapsulated and tunneled as Layer 3 IP packets, rather than individual Layer 2 VLANs.

WLC activities:
- <b>Dynamic channel assignment</b>: The WLC can automatically choose and configure the RF channel used by each AP, based on other active access points in the area.
- <b>Transmit power optimization</b>: The WLC can automatically set the transmit power of each AP based on the coverage area needed.
- <b>Self-healing wireless coverage</b>: If an AP radio dies, the coverage hole can be “healed” by turning up the transmit power of surrounding APs automatically.
- <b>Flexible client roaming</b>: Clients can roam between APs with very fast roaming times. ■ Dynamic client load balancing: If two or more APs are positioned to cover the same geographic area, the WLC can associate clients with the least used AP. This distributes the client load across the APs.
- <b>RF monitoring</b>: The WLC manages each AP so that it scans channels to monitor the RF usage. By listening to a channel, the WLC can remotely gather information about RF interference, noise, signals from neighboring APs, and signals from rogue APs or ad hoc clients.
- <b>Security management</b>: The WLC can authenticate clients from a central service and can require wireless clients to obtain an IP address from a trusted DHCP server before allowing them to associate and access the WLAN.
- <b>Wireless intrusion protection system</b>: Leveraging its central location, the WLC can monitor client data to detect and prevent malicious activity.

## Comparing Wireless LAN Controller Deployments

locate the WLC in a central location so that you can maximize the number of APs joined to it. This is usually called a unified or centralized WLC deployment. A centralized WLC also provides a convenient place to enforce security policies that affect all wireless users. Typical unified WLCs can support a maximum of 6000 APs. If you have more APs than the maximum, you will need to add more WLCs to the design, each located centrally.


A WLC can also be located in a central position in the network, inside a data center in a private cloud, known as a cloud-based WLC deployment, where the WLC exists as a virtual machine rather than a physical device. Such a controller can typically support up to 3000 APs. If your wireless network scales beyond that, then additional WLCs can be added as more virtual machines.

For small campuses or distributed branch locations, where the number of APs is relatively small in each, the WLC can be co-located with a stack of switches. This is known as an embedded WLC deployment because the controller is embedded within the switching hardware. Typical Cisco embedded WLCs can support up to 200 APs. The APs do not necessarily have to be connected to the switches that host the WLC; APs connected to other switches in other locations can join the embedded WLC too. As the number of APs grows, additional WLCs can be added by embedding them in other switch stacks at the site.

In small-scale environments, such as small, midsize, or multisite branch locations, you might not want to invest in dedicated WLCs at all. In this case, the WLC function can be co-located with an AP that is installed at the branch site. This is known as a Cisco Mobility Express WLC deployment. The AP that hosts the WLC forms a CAPWAP tunnel with the WLC, along with any other APs at the same location. A Mobility Express WLC can support up to 100 APs.

#### Summary of WLC Deployment Models

|Deployment Model|WLC Location (DC, Access, Central, AP)|AP Supported|Clients Supported|Typical Use|
|--|--|--|--|--|
|Unified|Central|6000|64,000|Large Enterprise|
|Cloud|DC|3000|32,000|Private Cloud|
|Embedded|Access|200|4000|Small Campus|
|Mobility Express|Other|100|2000|Branch location|
|Autonomous|N/A|N/A|N/A|N/A|

### Cisco AP Modes
Cisco APs can operate in either autonomous or lightweight mode, depending on which code image is loaded and run. From the WLC, you can also configure a lightweight AP to operate in one of the following special-purpose modes:
- <b>Local</b>: The default lightweight mode that offers one or more functioning BSSs on a specific channel. During times that it is not transmitting, the AP will scan the other channels to measure the level of noise, measure interference, discover rogue devices, and match against intrusion detection system (IDS) events.
- <b>Monitor</b>: The AP does not transmit at all, but its receiver is enabled to act as a dedicated sensor. The AP checks for IDS events, detects rogue access points, and determines the position of stations through location-based services.
- <b>FlexConnect</b>: An AP at a remote site can locally switch traffic between an SSID and a VLAN if its CAPWAP tunnel to the WLC is down and if it is configured to do so.
- <b>Sniffer</b>: An AP dedicates its radios to receiving 802.11 traffic from other sources, much like a sniffer or packet capture device. The captured traffic is then forwarded to a PC running network analyzer software such as Wildpackets OmniPeek or WireShark, where it can be analyzed further.
- <b>Rogue detector</b>: An AP dedicates itself to detecting rogue devices by correlating MAC addresses heard on the wired network with those heard over the air. Rogue devices are those that appear on both networks.
- <b>Bridge</b>: An AP becomes a dedicated bridge (point-to-point or point-to-multipoint) between two networks. Two APs in bridge mode can be used to link two locations separated by a distance. Multiple APs in bridge mode can form an indoor or outdoor mesh network.
- <b>Flex+Bridge</b>: FlexConnect operation is enabled on a mesh AP. ■ SE-Connect: The AP dedicates its radios to spectrum analysis on all wireless channels. You can remotely connect a PC running software such as MetaGeek Chanalyzer or Cisco Spectrum Expert to the AP to collect and analyze the spectrum analysis data to discover
sources of interference.