# Securing Wireless Networks
## Anatomy of a Secure Connection
### Authentication
Wireless authentication can take many forms. Some methods require only a static text string that is common across all trusted clients and APs. The text string is stored on the client device and presented directly to the AP when needed.

Other more stringent authentication methods require interaction with a corporate user database. The end user must enter a valid username and password— something that would not be known to a thief or an imposter.

Some common attacks focus on a malicious user pretending to be an AP. The fake AP can send beacons, answer probes, and associate clients just like the real AP it is impersonating. Once a client associates with the fake AP, the attacker can easily intercept all communication to and from the client from its central position. A fake AP could also send spoofed management frames to disassociate or deauthenticate legitimate and active clients, just to disrupt normal network operation. To prevent this type of man-in-the-middle attack, the client should authenticate the AP before the client itself is authenticated. 

### Message Privacy
To protect data privacy on a wireless network, the data should be encrypted for its journey through free space. In wireless networks, each WLAN may support only one authentication and encryption scheme, so all clients must use the same encryption method when they associate. The AP should securely negotiate a unique encryption key to use for each associated client.

### Message Integrity
A message integrity check (MIC) is a security tool that can protect against data tampering.

## Wireless Client Authentication Methods
### Open Authentication
The original 802.11 standard offered only two choices to authenticate a client: open authentication and WEP.

Open authentication is true to its name; it offers open access to a WLAN. The only requirement is that a client must use an 802.11 authentication request before it attempts to associate with an AP. 

The whole purpose of open authentication is to validate that a client is a valid 802.11 device by authenticating the wireless hardware and the protocol.  If any client screening is used at all, it comes in the form of web authentication.

### Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) 
WEP uses the RC4 cipher algorithm to make every wireless data frame private and hidden from eavesdroppers. The algorithm uses a string of bits as a key, commonly called a WEP key, to derive other encryption keys—one per wireless frame.

WEP is known as a shared-key security method.The WEP key can also be used as an optional authentication method as well as an encryption tool. Unless a client can use the correct WEP key, it cannot associate with an AP. The AP tests the client’s knowledge of the WEP key by sending it a random challenge phrase. The client encrypts the challenge phrase with WEP and returns the result to the AP. The AP can compare the client’s encryption with its own to see whether the two WEP keys yield identical results.

WEP keys can be either 40 or 104 bits long, represented by a string of 10 or 26 hex digits.

By 2004, the 802.11i amendment was ratified and WEP was officially deprecated. 

### 802.1x/EAP
Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) is a more flexible and scalable authentication framework built into the 802.11 standard. EAP defines a set of common functions that actual authentication methods can use to authenticate users. 

EAP has another interesting quality: it can integrate with the IEEE 802.1x port-based access control standard. When 802.1x is enabled, it limits access to a network media until a client authenticates. This means that a wireless client might be able to associate with an AP but will not be able to pass data to any other part of the network until it successfully authenticates.

With open and WEP authentication, wireless clients are authenticated locally at the AP without further intervention. The scenario changes with 802.1x; the client uses open authentication to associate with the AP, and then the actual client authentication process occurs at a dedicated authentication server.

The three-party 802.1x arrangement consists of the following entities:
- Supplicant: The client device that is requesting access 
- Authenticator: The network device that provides access to the network (usually a wireless LAN controller [WLC])
- Authentication server (AS): The device that takes user or client credentials and permits or denies network access based on a user database and policies (usually a RADIUS server)

####  Lightweight EAP (LEAP)
At the time, WEP-based hardware was still widely used. Therefore, LEAP attempted to overcome WEP weaknesses by using dynamic WEP keys that changed frequently. Nevertheless, the method used to encrypt the challenge messages was found to be vulnerable, so LEAP has since been deprecated.

#### EAP-FAST
EAP Flexible Authentication by Secure Tunneling (EAP-FAST). Authentication credentials are protected by passing a protected access credential (PAC) between the AS and the supplicant. The PAC is a form of shared secret that is generated by the AS and used for mutual authentication. EAP-FAST is a sequence of three phases:
- Phase 0: The PAC is generated or provisioned and installed on the client. - Phase 1: After the supplicant and AS have authenticated each other, they negotiate a Transport Layer Security (TLS) tunnel.
- Phase 2: The end user can then be authenticated through the TLS tunnel for additional security.


Notice that two separate authentication processes occur in EAP-FAST—one between the AS and the supplicant and another with the end user. These occur in a nested fashion, as an outer authentication (outside the TLS tunnel) and an inner authentication (inside the TLS tunnel).
Like other EAP-based methods, a RADIUS server is required. However, the RADIUS server must also operate as an EAP-FAST server to be able to generate PACs, one per user.

#### Protected EAP (PEAP)
PEAP method uses an inner and outer authentication; however, the AS presents a digital certificate to authenticate itself with the supplicant in the outer authentication. If the supplicant is satisfied with the identity of the AS, the two will build a TLS tunnel to be used for the inner client authentication and encryption key exchange.

The digital certificate of the AS consists of data in a standard format that identifies the owner and is “signed” or validated by a third party. The third party is known as a certificate authority (CA) and is known and trusted by both the AS and the supplicants. The supplicant must also possess the CA certificate just so that it can validate the one it receives from the AS. The certificate is also used to pass a public key, in plain view, which can be used to help decrypt messages from the AS.

Notice that only the AS has a certificate for PEAP. That means the supplicant can readily authenticate the AS. The client does not have or use a certificate of its own, so it must be authenticated within the TLS tunnel using one of the following two methods:
- MSCHAPv2: Microsoft Challenge Authentication Protocol version 2 
- GTC: Generic Token Card; a hardware device that generates one-time passwords for the user or a manually generated password

#### EAP Transport Layer Security (EAP-TLS)
EAP-TLS goes one step further by requiring certificates on the AS and on every client device. 

EAP-TLS is considered to be the most secure wireless authentication method available; however, implementing it can sometimes be complex. Along with the AS, each wireless client must obtain and install a certificate. Manually installing certificates on hundreds or thousands of clients can be impractical. Instead, you would need to implement a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) that could supply certificates securely and efficiently and revoke them when a client or user should no longer have access to the network. This usually involves setting up your own CA or building a trust relationship with a third-party CA that can supply certificates to your clients.

    EAP-TLS is practical only if the wireless clients can accept and use digital certificates. Many wireless devices, such as communicators, medical devices, and RFID tags, have an underlying operating system that cannot interface with a CA or use certificates.

## Wireless Privacy and Integrity Methods
### Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP)

TKIP adds the following security features using legacy hardware and the underlying WEP encryption:
- MIC: This efficient algorithm adds a hash value to each frame as a message integrity check to prevent tampering; commonly called “Michael” as an informal reference to MIC.
- Time stamp: A time stamp is added into the MIC to prevent replay attacks that attempt to reuse or replay frames that have already been sent.
- Sender’s MAC address: The MIC also includes the sender’s MAC address as evidence of the frame source.
- TKIP sequence counter: This feature provides a record of frames sent by a unique MAC address, to prevent frames from being replayed as an attack.
- Key mixing algorithm: This algorithm computes a unique 128-bit WEP key for each frame.
- Longer initialization vector (IV): The IV size is doubled from 24 to 48 bits, making it virtually impossible to exhaust all WEP keys by brute-force calculation.

TKIP became a reasonably secure stopgap security method, buying time until the 802.11i standard could be ratified. Some attacks have been created against TKIP, so it, too, should be avoided if a better method is available. In fact, TKIP was deprecated in the 802.11-2012 standard.

#### Counter/CBC-MAC Protocol (CCMP) 
CCMP consists of two algorithms: - AES counter mode encryption
- Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code (CBC-MAC) used as a message integrity check (MIC)

The Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) is the current encryption algorithm adopted by U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the U.S. government, and widely used around the world. In other words, AES is open, publicly accessible, and represents the most secure encryption method available today.

#### Galois/Counter Mode Protocol (GCMP)
A robust authenticated encryption suite that is more secure and more efficient than CCMP. GCMP consists of two algorithms: 
- AES counter mode encryption 
- Galois Message Authentication Code (GMAC) used as a message integrity check (MIC) 

GCMP is used in WPA3. 

## WPA, WPA2, and WPA3
- WPA was based on parts of 802.11i and included 802.1x authentication, TKIP, and a method for dynamic encryption key management.
- WPA2 is based around the superior AES CCMP algorithms, rather than the deprecated TKIP from WPA.
- WPA3 leverages stronger encryption by AES with the Galois/Counter Mode Protocol (GCMP). It also uses Protected Management Frames (PMF) to secure important 802.11 management frames between APs and clients, to prevent malicious activity that might spoof or tamper with a BSS’s operation. WPA3 includes other features beyond WPA and WPA2, such as Simultaneous Authentication of Equals (SAE), Forward secrecy, and Protected management frames (PMF).

|Authentication and Encryption Feature Support |WPA|WPA2|WPA3|
|---|---|---|---|
|Authentication with Pre-Shared Keys?|Yes|Yes|Yes|
|Authentication with 802.1x?|Yes|Yes|Yes|
|Encryption and MIC with TKIP?|Yes|No|No|
|Encryption and MIC with AES and CCMP?|Yes|Yes|No|
|Encryption and MIC with AES and GCMP?|No|No|Yes|

All three WPA versions support two client authentication modes: a pre-shared key (PSK) or 802.1x, known as personal mode and enterprise mode. 

With WPA-Personal and WPA2-Personal modes, a malicious user can eavesdrop and capture the four-way handshake between a client and an AP. That user can then use a dictionary
attack to automate guessing the pre-shared key. 

WPA3-Personal avoids such an attack by strengthening the key exchange between clients and APs through a method known as Simultaneous Authentication of Equals (SAE). Rather than a client authenticating against a server or AP, the client and AP can initiate the authentication process equally and even simultaneously.

Even if a password or key is compromised, WPA3-Personal offers forward secrecy, which prevents attackers from being able to use a key to unencrypt data that has already been
transmitted over the air.

     WPA, WPA2, and WPA3 also support 802.1x or enterprise authentication. This implies EAP-based authentication, but the WPA versions do not require any specific EAP method. Instead, the Wi-Fi Alliance certifies interoperability with well- known EAP methods like EAP-TLS, PEAP, EAP-TTLS, and EAP-SIM. 