# Building a Wireless LAN
## Building a Wireless LAN

A lightweight AP has a single wired Ethernet interface; however, it must be paired with a WLC to be fully functional. 

To configure and manage Cisco APs, you can connect a serial console cable from your PC to the console port on the AP. Once the AP is operational and has an IP address, you can also use Telnet or SSH to connect to its CLI over the wired network. Autonomous APs support browser-based management sessions via HTTP and HTTPS. You can manage lightweight APs from a browser session to the WLC.

Both the web-based GUI and the CLI require management users to log in. Users can be authenticated against an internal list of local usernames or against an authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA) server, such as TACACS+ or RADIUS.

## Connecting a Cisco WLC
Cisco wireless controllers differ a bit; ports and interfaces refer to different concepts. Controller ports are physical connections made to an external wired or switched network, whereas interfaces are logical connections made internally within the controller. 

### Using WLC Ports
You can connect several different types of controller ports to your network:
- Service port: Used for out-of-band management, system recovery, and initial boot functions; always connects to a switch port in access mode
- Distribution system port: Used for all normal AP and management traffic; usually connects to a switch port in 802.1Q trunk mode
- Console port: Used for out-of-band management, system recovery, and initial boot functions; asynchronous connection to a terminal emulator (9600 baud, 8 data bits, 1 stop bit, by default)
- Redundancy port: Used to connect to a peer controller for high availability (HA) operation

Controllers can have a single service port that must be connected to a switched network. Usually, the service port is assigned to a management VLAN so that you can access the controller with SSH or a web browser to perform initial configuration or for maintenance. Notice that the service port supports only a single VLAN, so the corresponding switch port must be configured for access mode only.

Controllers also have multiple distribution system ports that you must connect to the network. These ports carry most of the data coming to and going from the controller. For example, the CAPWAP tunnels (control and data) that extend to each of a controller’s APs pass across the distribution system ports. Client data also passes from wireless LANs to
wired VLANs over the ports.

Because the distribution system ports must carry data that is associated with many different VLANs, VLAN tags and numbers become very important. For that reason, the distribution system ports always operate in 802.1Q trunking mode. When you connect the ports to a switch, you should also configure the switch ports for unconditional 802.1Q trunk mode.

The distribution system ports can operate independently, each one transporting multiple VLANs to a unique group of internal controller interfaces. For resiliency, you can configure distribution system ports in redundant pairs. One port is primarily used; if it fails, a backup port is used instead.

To get the most use out of each distribution system port, you can configure all of them to operate as a single logical group, much like an EtherChannel or port-channel on a switch. Controller distribution system ports can be configured as a link aggregation group (LAG) such that they are bundled together to act as one larger link. 

    Be aware that even though the LAG acts as a traditional EtherChannel, Cisco WLCs do not support any link aggregation negotiation protocol, like LACP or PaGP, at all. Therefore, you must configure the switch ports as an unconditional or always-on EtherChannel.

### Using WLC Interfaces
isco wireless controllers provide the necessary connectivity through internal logical interfaces, which must be configured with an IP address, subnet mask, default gateway, and a Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) server. Each interface is then assigned to a physical port and a VLAN ID. 

- Management interface: Used for normal management traffic, such as RADIUS user authentication, WLC-to-WLC communication, web-based and SSH sessions, SNMP, Network Time Protocol (NTP), syslog, and so on. The management interface is also used to terminate CAPWAP tunnels between the controller and its APs.
- Redundancy management: The management IP address of a redundant WLC that is part of a high availability pair of controllers. The active WLC uses the management interface address, while the standby WLC uses the redundancy management address.
- Virtual interface: IP address facing wireless clients when the controller is relaying client DHCP requests, performing client web authentication, and supporting client mobility.
- Service port interface: Bound to the service port and used for out-of-band management.
- Dynamic interface: Used to connect a VLAN to a WLAN.

The management interface faces the switched network, where management users and APs are located. Management traffic will usually consist of protocols like HTTPS, SSH, SNMP, NTP, TFTP, and so on. In addition, management interface traffic consists of CAPWAP packets that carry control and data tunnels to and from the APs.

The virtual interface is used only for certain client-facing operations. For example, when a wireless client issues a request to obtain an IP address, the controller can relay the request on to an actual DHCP server that can provide the appropriate IP address. From the client’s perspective, the DHCP server appears to be the controller’s virtual interface address. Clients may see the virtual interface’s address, but that address is never used when the controller communicates with other devices on the switched network.Because the virtual interface is used only for some client management functions, you should configure it with a unique, nonroutable address. 

The virtual interface address is also used to support client mobility. For that reason, every controller that exists in the same mobility group should be configured with a virtual address that is identical to the others. By using one common virtual address, all the controllers will appear to operate as a cluster as clients roam from controller to controller.
Dynamic interfaces map WLANs to VLANs, making the logical connections between wireless and wired networks. You will configure one dynamic interface for each wireless LAN that is offered by the controller’s APs and then map the interface to the WLAN. Each dynamic interface must also be configured with its own IP address and can act as a DHCP relay for wireless clients. To filter traffic passing through a dynamic interface, you can configure an optional access list.

## Configuring a WLAN
From a wireless perspective, the AP advertises a Service Set Identifier (SSID) for the client to join. From a wired perspective, the controller connects to a virtual LAN (VLAN) through one of its dynamic interfaces. To complete the path between the SSID and the VLAN you must first define a WLAN on the controller.

ration out to all of its APs by default. From that point on, wireless clients will be able to learn about the new WLAN by receiving its beacons and will be able to probe and join the new BSS.
Like VLANs, you can use WLANs to segregate wireless users and their traffic into logical networks. Users associated with one WLAN cannot cross over into another one unless their traffic is bridged or routed from one VLAN to another through the wired network infrastructure.

- Cisco controllers support a maximum of 512 WLANs, but only 16 of them can be actively configured on an AP.
- Advertising each WLAN to potential wireless clients uses up valuable airtime.

Every AP must broadcast beacon management frames at regular intervals to advertise the existence of a BSS. Because each WLAN is bound to a BSS, each WLAN must be advertised with its own beacons. Beacons are normally sent 10 times per second, or once every 100 ms, at the lowest mandatory data rate. The more WLANs you have created, the more beacons you will need to announce them.

Even further, the lower the mandatory data rate, the more time each beacon will take to be transmitted. The end result is this: if you create too many WLANs, a channel can be starved of any usable airtime. Clients will have a hard time transmitting their own data because the channel is overly busy with beacon transmissions coming from the AP. As a rule of thumb, always limit the number of WLANs to five or fewer; a maximum of three WLANs is best.

By default, a controller has a limited initial configuration, so no WLANs are defined. Before you create a new WLAN, think about the following parameters it will need to have: 
- SSID string 
- Controller interface and VLAN number
- Type of wireless security needed

<br>

    WLAN templates are applied to specific WLAN ID numbers on controllers. The WLAN ID is only locally significant and is not passed between controllers. As a rule, you should keep the sequence of WLAN names and IDs consistent across multiple controllers so that any configuration templates you use in the future will be applied to the same WLANs on each controller.