Gigabit Ethernet Interface Converter (GBIC): The original form factor for a removable transceiver for Gigabit interfaces; larger than SFPs 
Small Form Pluggable (SFP): The replacement for GBICs, used on Gigabit interfaces, with a smaller size, taking less space on the side of the networking card or switch. 
Small Form Pluggable Plus (SFP+): Same size as the SFP, but used on 10-Gbps interfaces.
(The Plus refers to the increase in speed compared to SFPs.)


Ethernet NIC transmitters use the pair connected to pins 1 and 2; the NIC receivers use a pair of wires at pin positions 3 and 6.
100BASE-T standard adds a pair at pins 4 and 5 and the final pair at pins 7 and 8
Crossover cable: If the endpoints transmit on the same pin pair 
Straight-through cable: If the endpoints transmit on different pin pairs


Preamble 
Start Frame Delimiter (SFD)
Destination MAC Address
Source MAC Address
Type Data and Pad*
Frame Check Sequence (FCS)
Bytes 7 1 6 6 2 46–1500 4
Description 
Synchronization.
Signifies that the next byte begins the Destination MAC Address field.
Identifies the intended recipient of this frame. Identifies the sender of this frame.
Defines the type of protocol listed inside the frame; today, most likely identifies IP version 4 (IPv4) or IP version 6 (IPv6).
Holds data from a higher layer, typically an L3PDU (usually an IPv4 or IPv6 packet). The sender adds padding to meet the minimum length requirement for this field (46 bytes).
Provides a method for the receiving NIC to determine whether
the frame experienced transmission errors.

Media Access Control (MAC) addresses, are 6-byte-long (48-bit-long) binary numbers. 3-byte code, called the organizationally unique identifier (OUI)
FCS : error detection does not also mean error recovery

Half duplex: The device must wait to send if it is currently receiving a frame; in other words, it cannot send and receive at the same time. Full duplex: The device does not have to wait before sending; it can send and receive at
the same time.

Carrier sense multiple access with collision detection (CSMA/CD)