# Network Address Translation
## IPv4 address scalability problem :
 * <b>Network Address Translation (NAT)</b> - Enable approximately 65,000 TCP/UDP sessions to be supported by a single public IPv4 address.
 * <b>Private addressing</b> - Enable the use of NAT for enterprise Internet connections, with private addresses used inside the enterprise.
 * <b>Classless interdomain routing</b> - Assign more-specific public IPv4 address blocks to companies than Class A, B, and C networks.Aggregate routes to public IPv4 addresses based on worldwide address allocation plan.

 #### CIDR
Defines a way to assign public IP addresses, worldwide, to allow route aggregation or route summarization. These route summaries greatly reduce the size of routing tables in Internet routers.

It also allows RIRs and ISPs to reduce waste by assigning a subset of a classful network to a single customer.

#### Private Addressing
A set of networks that will never be assigned to any organization as a registered network number.
|IP Range|Networks|Class|Nr. of Networks|
|---|---|---|---|
|10.0.0.0 to 10.255.255.255|10.0.0.0|A|1|
|172.16.0.0 to 172.31.255.255|172.16.0.0 – 172.31.0.0|B|16|
|192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255|192.168.0.0 – 192.168.255.0|C|256|

## Network Address Translation Concepts
NAT achieves its goal by using a valid registered IP address to represent the private address to the rest of the Internet.

Source NAT is the type of NAT that allows enterprises to use private addresses and still communicate with hosts in the Internet. 

### Static NAT
IP addresses statically mapped to each other (one-to-one mapping). Inside local for the private IP addresses and inside global for the public IP addresses .

The term inside local refers to the address used for the host inside the enterprise, the address used locally versus globally, which means in the enterprise instead of the global Internet. Conversely, the term inside global still refers to an address used for the host inside the enterprise, but it is the global address used while the packet flows through the
Internet

NAT feature called destination NAT, not covered in this book, uses similar terms outside local and outside global. However, with source NAT, one of the terms, outside global, is used. This term refers to the host that resides outside the enterprise. Because source NAT does not change that address, the term outside global applies at all times .

### Dynamic NAT
One-to-one mapping between an inside local and inside global address, and changes the IP addresses in packets as they exit and enter the inside network. However, the mapping of an inside local address to an inside global address happens dynamically.<br>

Dynamic NAT sets up a pool of possible inside global addresses and defines matching criteria to determine which inside local IP addresses should be translated with NAT.<br>

The dynamic entry stays in the table as long as traffic flows occasionally. You can configure a timeout value that defines how long the router should wait, having not translated any packets with that address, before removing the dynamic entry. You can also manually clear the dynamic entries from the table using the <code>clear ip nat translation *</code> command.<br>

The router allocates addresses from the pool until all are allocated. After, the router simply discards the packet.

### Overloading NAT with Port Address Translation
NAT Overload feature, also called Port Address Translation (PAT). From a transport layer perspective, the server doesn’t care whether it has one connection each to three different hosts or three connections to a single host IP address. NAT overload (PAT) translates not only the address, but the port number when necessary, making what looks like many TCP or UDP flows from different hosts look like the same number of flows from one host.<br>

Because the port number field has 16 bits, NAT overload can use more than 65,000 port numbers, allowing it to scale well without needing many registered IP addresses — in many cases, needing only one inside global IP address.

## NAT Confirguration
### Static NAT

* <code>ip nat inside</code> command in interface configuration mode to configure interfaces to be in the inside part of the NAT design.
* <code>ip nat outside</code> command in interface configuration mode to configure interfaces to be in the outside part of the NAT design.
* <code>ip nat inside source static inside-local inside-global</code> command in global configuration mode to configure the static mappings.

### Dynamic Nat

* Configure an ACL that matches the packets entering inside interfaces for which NAT should be performed.
* Use the ip nat pool name first-address last-address netmask subnet-mask command in global configuration mode to configure the pool of public registered IP addresses.
* Use the ip nat inside source list acl-number pool pool-name command in global configuration mode to enable dynamic NAT

Dynamic NAT also performs a verification check on the ip nat pool command with the required netmask parameter. If the address range would not be in the same subnet, assuming the configured netmask was used on the addresses in the configured range, then IOS
will reject the ip nat pool command. 


<br>

    interface GigabitEthernet0/0 
      ip address 10.1.1.3 255.255.255.0 
      ip nat inside
    interface Serial0/0/0
      ip address 200.1.1.251 255.255.255.0 
      ip nat outside
    ip nat pool fred 200.1.1.1 200.1.1.2 netmask 255.255.255.252 
    ip nat inside source list 1 pool fred
    access-list 1 permit 10.1.1.2
    access-list 1 permit 10.1.1.1

<code># show ip nat translations</code><br>
<code># show ip nat statistics</code><br>
The first miss counter, now at 1, means that one packet arrived that needed NAT, but there was no NAT table entry. NAT reacted and added a NAT table entry, so the hit counter of 69 means that the next 69 packets used the newly added
NAT table entry.
<code># clear ip nat translation *</code><br>

### NAT Overload (PAT) Configuration
* Configure an ACL that matches the packets entering inside interfaces.
* Configure the <code>ip nat inside source list acl-number interface type/number
overload</code> global configuration command

overload parameter means that overload is enabled. Without this parameter, the router does not perform overload, just
dynamic NAT

## NAT Troubleshooting
* Reversed inside and outside
* Static NAT: Check the ip nat inside source static command to ensure it lists the inside local address first and the inside global IP address second.
* Dynamic NAT (ACL): Ensure that the ACL configured to match packets sent by the inside hosts match that host’s packets before any NAT translation has occurred.
* Dynamic NAT (pool): For dynamic NAT without PAT, ensure that the pool has enough IP addresses. 
* PAT: It is easy to forget to add the overload option
* ACL: Perhaps NAT has been configured correctly, but an ACL exists on one of the interfaces, discarding the packets. Note that the order of operations inside the router matters in this case. For packets entering an interface, IOS processes ACLs before NAT. For packets exiting an interface, IOS processes any outbound ACL after translating the addresses with NAT .
* User traffic required
* IPv4 routing: IPv4 routing could prevent packets from arriving on either side of the NAT router. 