# TOO MUCH CONTENT > Read the book
# Quality of Service (QoS)
QoS refers to the tools that networking devices use to apply some different treatment to packets in the network as they pass through the device.

 QoS tools give you the means to manage four characteristics of network traffic: 
* <b>Bandwidth</b> - speed of a link, in bits per second (bps).QoS tools determine what packet is sent over the link next, so the networking device is in control of which messages get access to the bandwidth next and how much of that bandwidth (capacity) each type of traffic gets over time.
* <b>Delay</b> - one-way delay or round-trip delay. One-way delay refers to the time between sending one packet and that same packet arriving at the destination host. Round-trip delay counts the one-way delay plus the time for the receiver of the first packet to send back a packet—in other words, the time it takes to send one packet between two hosts and receive one back. 
* <b>Jitter</b> - variation in one-way delay between consecutive packets sent by the same application
* <b>Loss</b> - number of lost messages, usually as a percentage of packets sent

guidelines for interactive voice : 
* Delay (one-way): 150 ms or less 
* Jitter: 30 ms or less
* Loss: 1% or less


### Classification and Marking
is about the marking of packets and the definition of trust boundaries. classifies packets based on their header contents, and then marks the message by changing some bits in specific header fields.

QoS tools are enabled on an interface. Also like ACLs, QoS tools are enabled for a direction: packets entering the interface (before the forwarding decision) or for messages exiting the interface (after the forwarding decision).

Routers use queuing tools to place some packets in one output queue, other packets in another, and so on, when the outgoing interface happens to be busy. Then, when the outgoing interface becomes available to send another message, the queuing tool’s scheduler algorithm can pick the next message from any one of the queues, prioritizing traffic based on the rules configured by
the network engineer

Work to match packets can even degrade device performance.  doing complex matching early in the life of a packet and then marking the packet. <b>Marking</b> means that the QoS tool changes one or more header fields, setting a value in the header's <i>Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP)</i> field, a 6-bit field in the IP header meant for QoS marking.
### Queuing
describes the scheduling of packets to give one type of packet priority over another.
### Shaping and Policing
explains these two tools together because they are often used on opposite ends of a link.
### Congestion Avoidance
addresses how to manage the packet loss that occurs when network devices get too busy.