# Miscellaneous IP Services
## First Hop Redundancy Protocol
First Hop Redundancy Protocol (FHRP) refers to the category of protocols that can be used so that the hosts take advantage of redundant routers in a subnet.

Network engineers refer to any one component that, if it fails, brings down that part of the network as a single point of failure.

With FHRP the two routers appear to be a single default router. The users never have to do anything: their default router setting remains the same, and their ARP table even remains the same.

Each FHRP makes the following happen: 
1. All hosts act like they always have, with one default router setting that never has to change.
2. The default routers share a virtual IP address in the subnet, defined by the FHRP. 
3. Hosts use the FHRP virtual IP address as their default router address. 
4. The routers exchange FHRP protocol messages so that both agree as to which router does what work at any point in time.
5. When a router fails or has some other problem, the routers use the FHRP to choose which router takes over responsibilities from the failed router.

### The Three Solutions for First-Hop Redundancy
|Acronym|Full Name|Origin|Redundancy Approach|Load Balancing per ...|
|---|---|---|---|---|
HSRP|Hot Standby Router Protocol|Cisco|active/standby|subnet|
|VRRP | Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol|RFC 5798| active/standby |subnet|
|GLBP| Gateway Load Balancing Protocol|Cisco |active/active| host|

### HSRP Concepts
HSRP operates with an active/standby model (also more generally called active/passive). HSRP allows two (or more) routers to cooperate, all being willing to act as the default router. However, at any one time, only one router actively supports the end-user traffic. The packets sent by hosts to their default router flow to that one active router. Then the other routers, with an HSRP standby state, sit there patiently waiting to take over should the active HSRP router have a problem.

The HSRP active router implements a virtual IP address and matching virtual MAC address. This virtual IP address exists as part of the HSRP configuration, which is an additional configuration item compared to the usual ip address interface subcommand. This virtual IP address is in the same subnet as the interface IP address, but it is a different IP address. The router then automatically creates the virtual MAC address. All the cooperating HSRP routers know these virtual addresses, but only the HSRP active router uses these addresses at any one point in time.

Hosts refer to the virtual IP address as their default router address.

When the failover occurs, changes happen on both the routers and the LAN switches. The new active router has to be ready to receive packets (encapsulated inside frames) using the virtual IP and MAC addresses. However, the LAN switches formerly sent frames destined for VMAC1 to router R1. Now the switches must know to send the frames to the new active router.
To make the switches change their MAC address table entries for VMAC1, R2 sends an Ethernet frame with VMAC1 as the source MAC address. The switches, as normal, learn the source MAC address (VMAC1), but with new ports that point toward R2. The frame is also a LAN broadcast, so all the switches learn a MAC table entry for VMAC1 that leads toward R2. (By the way, this Ethernet frame holds an ARP Reply message, called a gratuitous ARP, because the router sends it without first receiving an ARP Request.)

### HSRP Load Balancing
The active/standby model of HSRP means that in one subnet all hosts send their off-subnet packets through only one router. In other words, the routers do not share the workload.

HSRP does support load balancing by preferring different routers to be the active router in different subnets.

HSRP can be configured to prefer one router as active in one VLAN and another router as active in another VLAN, balancing the traffic. Or you can configure multiple instances of HSRP in the same subnet (called multiple HSRP groups), preferring one router to be active in one group and the other
router to be preferred as active in another.

FHRPs are needed on any device that acts as a default router, which of course includes both traditional routers and Layer 3 switches. HSRP can be configured on routers and Layer 3 switches on interfaces that have IP addresses configured. However, in most cases, HSRP is used on interfaces to subnets that have hosts that need to use a default router. Those interfaces include router physical interfaces, router trunk subinterfaces, and Layer 3 switched virtual interfaces (SVI).

## Simple Network Management Protocol
Information about devices on a TCP/IP-based network—configuration settings, status information, counters, and so on—could be broken down into a database of variables. Those variables could then be collected by management software to monitor and manage the IP-based network, implemented by Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP), with the two common versions used today: SNMPv2c and SNMPv3.

SNMP is an application layer protocol that provides a message format for communication between what are termed managers and agents. 

An SNMP manager is a network management application running on a PC or server, with that host typically being called a Network Management Station (NMS). Many SNMP agents exist in the network, one per device that is managed. 

The SNMP database, called the Management Information Base (MIB), has some core elements in common across most networking devices. It also has a large number of variables unique to that type of device—for instance, router MIBs will include variables not needed on switch MIBs, and vice versa. (even more than 7000 MIB variables on a router.) IOS on routers and switches include an SNMP agent, with built-in MIB.

### SNMP Variable Reading and Writing: SNMP Get and Set

NMS uses the SNMP Get, GetNext, and GetBulk messages (together referenced simply as Get messages) to ask for information from an agent. The NMS sends an SNMP Set message to write variables on the SNMP agent as a means to change the configuration of the device.

NMP permits much flexibility in how you monitor variables in the MIB. Most commonly, a network administrator gathers and stores statistics over time using the NMS. The NMS, with the stored data, can then analyze various statistical facts such as averages, minimums, and maximums. To be proactive, administrators can set thresholds for certain key variables, telling the NMS to send a notification (email, text, and so on) when a threshold is passed.

### SNMP Notifications: Traps and Informs

SNMP agents can initiate communications to the NMS. These messages, generally called notifications, use two specific SNMP messages: Trap and Inform. SNMP agents send a Trap or Inform SNMP message to the NMS to list the state of certain MIB variables when those variables reach a certain state.

MP Traps and Inform messages have the exact same purpose but differ in the protocol mechanisms. 

SNMP Traps, available since the first version of SNMP from the late 1980s (SNMP Version 1, or SNMPv1), use a fire-and-forget process. The SNMP agent sends the Trap to the IP address of the NMS, with UDP as the transport protocol as with all SNMP messages, and with no application layer error recovery. If the Trap arrives, great; if it is lost in transit, it is lost.

Inform messages are like Trap messages but with reliability added. Added to the protocol with SNMP Version 2 (SNMPv2), Informs still use UDP but add application layer reliability.

The NMS must acknowledge receipt of the Inform with an SNMP Response message, or the SNMP agent will time out and resend the Inform.

Traps and Informs both have a useful role today, and Traps are still frequently used. Both inform the NMS. Traps use less overhead on the agent, while Informs improve reliability of the messages but require a little more overhead effort.

### The Management Information Base
The MIB defines variables whose values are set and updated by the agent. The MIB variables on the devices in the network enable the management software to monitor/control the network device. 

MIB defines each variable as an object ID (OID). On most devices, the MIB then organizes the OIDs based in part on RFC standards, and in part with vendorproprietary variables. The MIB organizes all the variables into a hierarchy of OIDs, usually shown as a tree. Each node in the tree can be described based on the tree structure sequence, either by name or by number.

### Securing SNMP
One strong method to secure SNMP is to use ACLs to limit SNMP messages to those from known servers only. SNMP agents on Cisco routers and switches support SNMP messages that flow in both IPv4 and IPv6 packets. The SNMP agent can configure an IPv4 ACL to filter incoming SNMP messages that arrive in IPv4 packets and an IPv6 ACL to filter SNMP messages that arrive in IPv6 packets.

NMS hosts seldom move and their IP addresses should be well known to the networking staff.

As for the SNMP protocol messages, all versions of SNMP support a basic clear-text password mechanism, although none of those versions refer to the mechanism as using a password. SNMP Version 3 (SNMPv3) adds more modern security as well.

SNMPv1 defined clear-text passwords called SNMP communities. Basically, both the SNMP agent and the SNMP manager need prior knowledge of the same SNMP community value (called a community string). The SNMP Get messages and the Set message include the appropriate community string value, in clear text.

SNMPv1 defines both a read-only community and a read-write community. The read-only (RO) community allows Get messages, and the read-write (RW) community allows both reads and writes (Gets and Sets). 

SNMPv2, and the related Community-based SNMP Version 2 (SNMPv2c), added a wrinkle in naming but basically kept the same community security feature (“Community-based SNMPv2,” came to be known simply as SNMPv2c).

SNMPv3 does away with communities and replaces them with:
- <b>Message integrity</b>: This mechanism, applied to all SNMPv3 messages, confirms whether or not each message has been changed during transit.
- <b>Authentication</b>: This optional feature adds authentication with both a username and password, with the password never sent as clear text. Instead, it uses a hashing method like many other modern authentication processes.
- <b>Encryption (privacy)</b>: This optional feature encrypts the contents of SNMPv3 messages so that attackers who intercept the messages cannot read their contents.

## FTP and TFTP
### Managing Cisco IOS Images with FTP/TFTP
IOS exists as a file. The IO file system (IFS) defines how IOS stores files (including the IOS file). The IOS image upgrade process occurs by copying new IOS files into the router and then booting the router with that new IOS.

As for the physical storage, Cisco routers typically use flash memory, with no hard disk drive. Flash memory is rewriteable, permanent storage. There are no moving parts in flash memory, so there is a smaller chance of failure as compared with disk drives.

<code># show file systems</code>

- Opaque: To represent logical internal file systems for the convenience of internal functions and commands
- Network: To represent external file systems found on different types of servers for the convenience of reference in different IOS commands
- Disk: For flash
- Usbflash: For USB flash
- NVRAM: A special type for NVRAM memory, the default location of the startup-config file

Many IOS commands refer to files in an IFS, but only some commands refer directly to the files by their formal names.

- <code>show running-config</code> command: Refers to file system:running-config 
- <code>show startup-config</code> command: Refers to file nvram:startup-config
- <code>show flash</code> command: Refers to default flash IFS (usually flash0:)

### Upgrading IOS Images
The only requirement is that the IOS be in some reachable file system—even if the file sits on an external server and the device loads the OS over the network. However, the best practice is to store each device’s IOS file in flash that will remain with the device permanently.

<code>copy tftp flash</code> ...

<code>show flash</code> or <code> dir flash0:</code> lists the content of the flash memory. 

show flash lists the bytes used, whereas the dir command lists the total bytes (bytes used plus bytes free)

### Verifying IOS Code Integrity with MD5
<code>verify /md5 flash0:c2900-universalk9-mz.SPA.154-3.M3.bin a79e325e6c498b70829d4db0afba5041</code> {IOS file and expected digest}

### Copying Images with FTP
Common Methods to Copy Files Outside a Router:
|Method|Method (Full Name)|Encrypted?|
|--|--|--|
|TFTP|Trivial File Transfer Protocol|NO|
|FTP|File Transfer Protocol|NO|
|SCP|Secure Copy Protocol|YES|

<code>R1# copy ftp://username:password@192.168.1.170/c2900-universalk9-mz.SPA.155-2.T1.bin flash</code>

You can configure the FTP username and password on the router so that you do not have to include them in the copy command with the
global configuration commands <code>ip ftp username wendell</code> and <code>ip ftp password odom </code>

### The FTP and TFTP Protocols
FTP uses TCP as its transport protocol, relying on TCP to provide an error-free in-order deliver of data so that the FTP application knows that each file transfer creates an exact copy of the file with no omissions. FTP uses well-known TCP port 21 and in some cases also well-known port 20.

The commands that flow over the initial TCP connection—called the FTP control connection—define the kinds of functions supported by FTP. Those commands allow the client to navigate around the directory structures of the server, list files, and then transfer files from the server (FTP GET) or to the server (FTP PUT). Some FTP actions are : 
- Navigate directories: List the current directory, change the current directory to a new directory, go back to the home directory, all on both the server and client side of the connection.
- Add/remove directories: Create new directories and remove existing directories on both the client and server.
- List files: List files on both the client and server. 
- File transfer: Get (client gets a copy of the file from the server), Put (client takes a file that exists on the client and puts a copy of the FTP server).

FTP can operate in either active or passive mode. The choice of mode may impact whether the TCP client can or cannot connect to the server and perform normal functions. 

FTP uses two types of TCP connections: 
- Control Connection: Used to exchange FTP commands 
- Data Connection: Used for sending and receiving data, both for file transfers and for output to display to a user

In active mode: 
1. The FTP client allocates a currently unused dynamic port and starts listening on that port.
2. The client identifies that port (and its IP address) to the FTP server by sending an FTP PORT command to the server.
3. The server, because it also operates in active mode, expects the PORT command; the server reacts and initiates the FTP data connection to the client’s address

Active mode works well with both the FTP client and server sitting inside the same enterprise network. When within the same network, typically no NAT function and no firewall sits between the two. However, if the FTP client sits in an enterprise network, and the FTP server resides somewhere in the Internet, an active mode connection typically fails. Most firewalls do not allow Internet-based hosts to initiate TCP connections to hosts inside the enterprise without a specific firewall rule allowing connections to a known port, and in this case, the FTP client allocates any available port number.

    FTP reserves two well-known ports: port 21 for control connections and port 20 for data connections. However, due to changes to FTP over the years, FTP often uses other TCP ports for the TCP data connection

Passive mode helps solve the firewall restrictions by having the FTP client initiate the FTP data connection to the server. However, passive mode does not simply cause the FTP client to connect to a well-known port on the server; it requires more exchanges of port numbers to use between the server and client, with these steps:
1. The FTP client changes to use FTP passive mode, notifying the server using the FTP PASV command .
2. The server chooses a port to listen on for the upcoming new TCP connection.
3. The FTP notifies the FTP client of its IP address and chosen port with the FTP PORT command .
4. The FTP client opens the TCP data connection to the IP address and port learned at the previous step.

### FTP over TLS (FTP Secure)
FTP does include the ability to use usernames and passwords for authentication and authorization; however, the username/password flows as clear text. Additionally, all data transfers flow as clear text.

With FTPS, the client and server still use FTP commands and still use both a control and data connection. However, FTPS encrypts both the control and data connections with TLS, including the exchange of the usernames and passwords. FTPS includes a few variations, including the FTPS explicit mode process : 
1. The client creates the FTP control TCP connection to server well-known port 21. 
2. The client initiates the use of TLS in the control connection with the FTP AUTH command .
3. When the user takes an action that requires an FTP data connection, the client creates an FTP data TCP connection to server well-known port 21.
4. The client initiates the use of TLS in the data connection with the FTP AUTH command.

In contrast, the implicit mode process begins with a required TLS connection, with no need for an FTP AUTH command, using well-known ports 990 (for the control connection) and 989 (for the data connection).

    SSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) is a different protocol than FTPS. SFTP uses SSH to encrypt file transfers over an SSH connection. However, the acronym SFTP does not refer to a secure version of FTP

### TFTP Protocol Basics
TFTP plays a much smaller role as a tool for the average user, but it does play a more useful role for IT support staff.

Trivial File Transfer Protocol uses UDP well-known port 69. Because it uses UDP, TFTP adds a feature to check each file for transmission errors by using a checksum process on each file after the transfer completes. Trivial means it has relatively small number of features, so lightweight.

It supports far fewer commands than FTP (fewer functions), meaning that the code requires less space to install, which can be useful for devices with limited memory. TFTP can Get and Put files, but it includes no commands to change directories, create/remove directories, or even to list files.

TFTP does not support even simple clear-text authentication. In effect, if a TFTP server is running, it should accept requests from any TFTP client.  TFTP has its best use as a temporary tool for quick file transfers in a controlled environment, particularly when the data itself does not have to be secure.