# LAN Architecture

## Campus LAN Topologies
<b>campus LAN</b> refers to the LAN created to support the devices in a building or in multiple buildings in somewhat close proximity

### Two-Tier Campus Design (Collapsed Core)
* <b>access switches</b> - switch forwards traffic from user devices and the rest of the LAN. Access switches connect directly to end users, providing user device access to the LAN and sit at the edge of the LAN
* <b>distribution switches</b> - provide a path through which the access switches can forward traffic to each other. By design, each of the access switches connects to at least one distribution switch, typically to two distribution switches for redundancy

A two-tier design solves two major design needs: 
* Provides a place to connect end-user devices (the access layer, with access switches) 
* Connects the switches with a reasonable number of cables and switch ports by connecting all 40 access switches to two distribution switches

#### Topology Terminology Seen Within a Two-Tier Design
* <b>Star</b>: A design in which one central device connects to several others, so that if you drew the links out in all directions, the design would look like a star with light shining in all directions. 
* <b>Full mesh</b>: For any set of network nodes, a design that connects a link between each pair of nodes. 
* <b>Partial mesh</b>: For any set of network nodes, a design that connects a link between some pairs of nodes, but not all. In other words, a mesh that is not a full mesh. 
* <b>Hybrid</b>: A design that combines topology design concepts into a larger (typically more complex) design.

The two-tier design is indeed a <b>hybrid design</b> that uses both a star topology at the access layer and a partial mesh at the distribution layer. It can be a full mesh as well, but the requirements would be too high, with a total number of connections N(N – 1)/2 and N(N – 1) interfaces. 

### Three-Tier Campus Design (Core)
If the campus campus has a few buildings where each has a two-tier design inside the building, with a pair of distribution switches in each building and access switches spread around the building as needed.A design with a third tier (a core tier) saves on switch ports and on cables. Cables running outside are often more expensive to install, and are almost always fiber cabling with more expensive switch
ports, so conserving the number of cables used between buildings can help reduce costs.
* <b> core switches</b>: provide connection to the distribution switches. With a partial mesh of links in the core, you still provide connectivity to all parts of the LAN and to the routers that send packets over the WAN, just with fewer links between building.

As a summary : 
* <b>Access</b>: Provides a connection point (access) for end-user devices. Does not forward frames between two other access switches under normal circumstances.
* <b>Distribution</b>: Provides an aggregation point for access switches, providing connectivity to the rest of the devices in the LAN, forwarding frames between switches, but not connecting directly to end-user devices.
* <b>Core</b>: Aggregates distribution switches in very large campus LANs, providing very high forwarding rates for the larger volume of traffic due to the size of the network.

## Small Office/Home Office
<i>wireless router</i>: a single device that acts like: 
* <b>Ethernet switch</b>, for the wired Ethernet connections
* <b>Wireless access point (AP)</b>, to communicate with the wireless devices and forward the frames to/from the wired network. the wireless AP acts autonomously, rather than with a WLC,
* <b>Router</b>, to route IP packets to/from the LAN and WAN (Internet) interfaces
* <b>Firewall</b>, which often defaults to allow only clients to connect to servers in the Internet, but not vice versa.

The router (combo) device connects with any available Internet access technology, including cable Internet, DSL, 4G/5G wireless, or fiber Ethernet.

## Power over Ethernet (PoE)
Classes of device types have been built to be able to receive their power over the Ethernet cable. With PoE companies can gain several advantages, including reduced cost by requiring fewer cable runs and better power management capabilities.

With PoE, some device, typically a LAN switch, acts as the Power Sourcing Equipment (PSE)and supplies DC power over the Ethernet UTP cable to the Powered Device (PD). It supplies DC power over the Ethernet cable, so the device does not need an AC/DC converter

### PoE Operation
PoE must have a means to avoid harming the devices on the end of the circuit. PoE must (and does) have processes in place to determine if PoE is needed, and for how much power.

PoE extends the IEEE autonegotiation mechanisms. The mechanisms need to work before the PD has booted, because the PD needs power before it can boot and initialize. By using these IEEE autonegotiation messages and watching for the return signal levels, PoE can determine whether the device on the end of the cable requires power (that is, it is a PD) and how much power to supply in these steps : 
- Do not supply power on a PoE-capable port unless negotiation identifies that the device needs power.
- Use Ethernet autonegotiation techniques, sending low power signals and monitoring the return signal, to determine the PoE power class, which determines how much power to supply to the device.
- If the device is identified as a PD, supply the power per the power class, which allows the device to boot.
- Monitor for changes to the power class, both with autonegotiation and listening for CDP and LLDP messages from the PD.
- If a new power class is identified, adjust the power level per that class.

### PoE and LAN Design
Planning with PoE in mind prepares the network to supply power to network devices, rather than reacting and missing opportunities to save money and time.

- Powered Devices: Determine the types of devices and specific models, along with their power requirements.
- Power Requirements: Plan the numbers of different types of PDs to connect into each wiring closet to build a power budget. 
- Switch Ports: Some switches support PoE standards on all ports, some on no ports, some on a subset of ports. Research the various switch models 
- Switch Power Supplies: Without PoE, when purchasing a switch, you choose a power supply so that it delivers enough power to power the switch itself. With PoE, the switch acts as a distributor of electrical power, so the switch power supply must deliver many more watts than it needs to run the switch itself. You will need to create a power budget per switch, based on the number of connected PDs, and purchase power supplies to match those requirements.
- PoE Standards versus Actual:  power budget needs to reserve less power than the maximum in order to account for the power needed by the switch to operate.