# Wan Architecture 
## Metro Ethernet  (MetroE)
Service that uses Ethernet physical links to connect the customer’s device to the service provider’s device. The service is a Layer 2 service in that the WAN provider forwards Ethernet frames from one customer device to another.

SP needs to build a network to create the Metro Ethernet service. To keep costs lower the SP puts a device (typically an Ethernet switch) physically near to as many customer sites as possible, in an SP facility called a <b>point of presence (PoP)</b>. The physical link between the customer and the SP is called an <b>access link</b> or, when using Ethernet specifically, an Ethernet access link. Everything that happens on that link falls within the definition of the <b>user network interface, or UNI</b>.

|MEF Service Name|MEF Short Name|Topology|Description|
|---|---|---|---|
|Ethernet Line Service|E-Line|Point-to-point|Two customer premise equipment (CPE) devices can exchange Ethernet frames, similar in concept to a leased line.|
|Ethernet LAN Service|E-LAN|Full mesh|Acts like a LAN; all devices can send frames to all other devices.|
|Ethernet Tree Service|E-Tree|Hub and spoke; partial mesh; point-to-multipoint|A central site can communicate to a defined set of remote sites, but the remote sites cannot communicate directly.|

    You might see the term Virtual Private Wire Service (VPWS) used for what MEF defines as E-Line service, and Virtual Private LAN Service (VPLS) used for what MEF defines as E-LAN service. You might also see the term Ethernet over MPLS (EoMPLS). All these terms refer to cases in which the SP uses MPLS internally to create what the customer sees as an Ethernet WAN service.

#### Ethernet Line Service (Point-to-Point)
deliver Ethernet frames across the service, as if the two customer routers had a rather long crossover cable connected between them. 

- The routers would use physical Ethernet interfaces. 
- The routers would configure IP addresses in the same subnet as each other.
- Their routing protocols would become neighbors and exchange routes.

The MetroE specifications define the concept of an Ethernet Virtual Connection, or EVC, to define which user (customer) devices can communicate with which. By definition, an E-Line service creates a point-to-point EVC.

Multiple E-Line services on a single access link, use 802.1Q trunking, with a different VLAN ID for each E-Line service. As a result, the router configuration can use a typical router configuration with trunking and subinterfaces.

The customer could use switches instead of routers to connect to the WAN. With MetroE, the LAN and WAN are both Ethernet, so an Ethernet switch becomes an option.

#### Ethernet LAN Service (Full Mesh)
Allow every site to send frames directly to every other site. It sounds a lot like an Ethernet LAN, so the MetroE service is called an Ethernet LAN service, or E-LAN.

#### Ethernet Tree Service (Hub and Spoke)

The Ethernet Tree service (E-Tree) creates a WAN topology in which the central site device can send Ethernet frames directly to each remote (leaf) site, but the remote (leaf) sites can send only to the central site.

The topology goes by many names: partial mesh, hub and spoke, and point-tomultipoint. 

## Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS)
MPLS creates a WAN service that routes IP packets between customer sites. The enterprise deploys routers and switches as usual. The SP then creates its own IP network, spanning a large geographic area. Issues arise when supporting multiple customers that use the same private IP network.

<b>label switching</b>: the routers on the edge of the MPLS network add and remove an MPLS header to packets as they enter and exit the MPLS network. The devices inside the MPLS network then use the label field inside that MPLS header when forwarding data across the MPLS network. The choices of the labels to use, along with other related logic, allow the MPLS VPN to create separate VPNs to keep different customers’ traffic separate.

    While MPLS VPNs provide a Layer 3 service to customers, MPLS itself is sometimes called a Layer 2.5 protocol because it adds the MPLS header between the data-link header (Layer 2) and the IP header (Layer 3).

SP’s MPLS VPN network:
- Will use a routing protocol to build routing protocol neighbor relationships with customer routers
- Will learn customer subnets/routes with those routing protocols 
- Will advertise a customer’s routes with a routing protocol so that all routers that customer connects to the MPLS VPN can learn all routes as advertised through the MPLS VPN network
- Will make decisions about MPLS VPN forwarding, including what MPLS labels to add and remove, based on the customer’s IP address space and customer IP routes. 

MPLS VPNs create a private network by keeping customer data separate, but not by encrypting the data. MPLS logic can keep the packets separate for each customer.

### MPLS VPN Physical Design and Topology
MPLS provides a Layer 3 service in that it promises to forward Layer 3 packets (IPv4 and IPv6). To support that service, MPLS SPs typically use routers at the edge of the MPLS networks because routers provide the function of forwarding Layer 3 packets.

customer edge device is typically a router, and it sits at a customer site—that is, at a site in the company that is buying the MPLS service. 


provider edge devices sit at the edge of the SP’s network, on the other
end of the access link.

The fact that MPLS acts as a Layer 3 service, discarding incoming data-link headers, means that any data-link protocol could in theory be used on MPLS access links. In reality, MPLS does support many types of access links.

The variety of access links available for MPLS networks makes MPLS a great option for building large enterprise networks. For sites that are more remote, the carrier may not offer MetroE services to that area, but many carriers can install a serial link to remote sites. Or, common Internet access technologies, like cable and wireless 4G/5G services, can also be used to access an MPLS network.

### MPLS and Quality of Service
With a QoS-capable WAN, the customer can mark VoIP packets so that the MPLS network can recognize VoIP packets and treat them better.

#### Layer 3 with MPLS VPN
The SP will even use routing protocols and advertise those customer routes across the WAN.  CE routers need to exchange routes with the PE routers in the MPLS network. Additionally, all the CE routers need to learn routes from the other CE routers—a process that relies on the PE routers.

MPLS allows for many familiar routing protocols on the edge of the MPLS network: RIPv2, EIGRP, OSPF, and even eBGP : 

- A CE router does become neighbors with the PE router on the other end of the access link.
- A CE router does not become neighbors with other CE routers. 
- The MPLS network does advertise the customer’s routes between the various PE routers so that the CE routers can learn all customer routes through their PE-CE routing protocol neighbor relationship.

<code>route redistribution</code> happens inside one router, taking routes from one routing protocol process and injecting them into another. MPLS does route redistribution in the PE routers between the routing protocol used by the customer and a variation of BGP called Multiprotocol BGP (MPBGP). (Redistribution is needed when the PE-CE routing protocol is not BGP.) 

MPLS VPNs use MPBGP (as opposed to other routing protocols) because MPBGP can advertise routes from multiple customers while keeping the routes logically separated. MPBGP can advertise routes for all those customers and mark which routes are from which customers. 

For all single enterprises, all the routers can learn routes to all the subnets reachable over the MPLS VPN WAN. WAN routes on the CE routers refer to the neighboring PE router as the next-hop router. Each CE router becomes a routing protocol neighbor with the SP’s PE router on the other end of the access link. Plus, MPLS provides the flexibility to use whatever type of physical access link makes sense for the location at each site, while still connecting to the same MPLS network.

## Internet VPNs
### Internet Access

Businesses can also use the Internet as a WAN service. First, the enterprise can connect each business site to the Internet. Then, using virtual private network (VPN) technology, the enterprise can create an Internet VPN. An Internet VPN can keep the enterprise’s packet private through encryption and other means, even while sending the data over the Internet.

#### Digital Subscriber Line
DSL gave telcos a way to offer a valuable high-speed Internet service to many of their existing telephone customers, over the same physical phone line already installed.

A DSL modem connects to a spare phone outlet. The DSL modem sends and receives the data, as digital signals, at higher frequencies, over the same local loop, even at the same time as a telephone call. (Note that the physical installation often uses frequency filters)

DSL access multiplexer (DSLAM) splits out the digital data over to the router .

#### Cable Internet
Cable Internet takes full advantage of existing cabling, using the existing cable TV (CATV) cable to send data. Like DSL, cable Internet uses asymmetric speeds, sending data faster downstream than upstream.

#### Wireless WAN (3G, 4G, LTE, 5G)
The phone has a small radio antenna, and the provider has a much larger antenna sitting at the top of a tower somewhere within miles of you and your phone. Phones, tablet computers, laptops, and even routers (with the correct interface cards) can communicate through to the Internet using this technology.

- Wireless Internet: This general term refers to Internet services from a mobile phone or from any device that uses the same technology. 
- 3G/4G Wireless: Short for third generation and fourth generation, these terms refer to the major changes over time to the mobile phone companies’ wireless networks. 
- LTE: Long-Term Evolution is a newer and faster technology considered to be part of fourth generation (4G) technology.
- 5G Wireless: This is the fifth major generation of wireless phone technology.

#### Fiber (Ethernet) Internet Access
DSL uses the copper wiring installed between the telco CO and the home. Cable uses the copper CATV cabling installed from the cable company to the
home. And, of course, wireless WAN technologies do not use cables for Internet access.

Fiber-optic cabling generally supports faster speeds for longer distances.  Often, the fiber uses Ethernet protocols over the fiber.


### Internet VPN Fundamentals
VPNs try to provide the same secure features as a private WAN while sending data over a network that is open to other parties.

- Confidentiality (privacy): Preventing anyone in the middle of the Internet (man in the middle) from being able to read the data
- Authentication: Verifying that the sender of the VPN packet is a legitimate device and not a device used by an attacker
- Data integrity: Verifying that the packet was not changed as the packet transited the Internet
- Anti-replay: Preventing a man in the middle from copying and later replaying the packets sent by a legitimate user, for the purpose of appearing to be a legitimate user

#### Site-to-Site VPNs with IPsec
A site-to-site VPN provides VPN services for the devices at two sites with a single VPN tunnel. The tunnel endpoints create the tunnel and leave it up and operating all the time. Devices connected receive all the benefits of the VPN, without requiring each device to create a VPN for themselves.

IPsec defines how two devices, both of which connect to the Internet, can achieve the main goals of a VPN as listed at the beginning of this section: confidentiality, authentication, data integrity, and anti-replay.

Its role as an architecture allows it to be added to and changed over time as improvements to individual security functions are made.

Devices use some related VPN technology like Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) to create the concept of a tunnel (a virtual link between the routers). Without IPsec, each GRE tunnel could be used to forward unencrypted traffic over the Internet. IPsec adds the security features to the data that flows over the tunnel. (Note that IPsec teams with other VPN technologies as well.)

#### Remote Access VPNs with TLS
Individual devices can dynamically initiate their own VPN connections in cases where a permanent site-to-site VPN does not exist.

While IPsec and GRE (or other) tunnels work well for site-to-site VPNs, remote access VPNs often use the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol.

Cisco AnyConnect Secure Mobility Client uses TLS to create one end of a VPN remote-access tunnel to the firewall. 

||Remote Access|Site-to-Site|
|---|---|---|
|Typical security protoco|TLS|IPsec|
|Devices supported by one VPN (one or many)|One|Many|
|Typical use: on-demand or permanent|On-demand|Permanent|