# Cloud Architecture
## Server Virtualization
### Cisco Server Hardware
- No KVM: no need for a permanent keyboard, video display, or mouse (collectively referred to as KVM).
- Racks of servers in a data center: servers into one room—a data center—and one goal is to not waste space. So, making servers with a form factor that fits in a standard rack makes for more efficient use of the available space.

 Cisco Unified Computing System (UCS)

### Server Virtualization Basics
a virtual machine, or VM  : OS instance is decoupled from the hardware.
*multithreading : The hypervisor (introduced shortly) can then treat each available thread as a virtual CPU (vCPU) and give each VM a number of vCPUs.

Each physical server (called a host in the server virtualization world) uses a hypervisor. The hypervisor manages and allocates the host hardware (CPU, RAM, etc.) to each VM based on the settings for the VM.

virtualization systems: dynamically create VMs, start them, move them (manually and automatically) to different servers, and stop them.

### Networking with Virtual Switches on a Virtualized Host
A physical server has one or more NICs, maybe as slow as 1 Gbps, often 10 Gbps today, and maybe as fast as 40 Gbps.

Normally, an OS has one NIC, maybe more. To make the OS
work as normal, each VM has (at least) one NIC, but for a VM, it is a virtual NIC (vNIC).

Most often, each server uses some kind of an internal Ethernet switch concept, often called a virtual switch, or vSwitch. The vSwitch can be supplied by the hypervisor vendor or by Cisco. For instance, Cisco offers the Nexus 1000VE virtual switch (which replaces the older and popular Nexus 1000V virtual switch). The Nexus 1000VE runs the NX-OS operating system
found in some of the Cisco Nexus data center switch product line. Motivation to use a vSwitch :

- Ports connected to VMs: The vSwitch can configure a port so that the VM will be in its own VLAN, or share the same VLAN with other VMs, or even use VLAN trunking to the VM itself.
- Ports connected to physical NICs: The vSwitch uses the physical NICs in the server hardware so that the switch is adjacent to the external physical LAN switch. The vSwitch can (and likely does) use VLAN trunking.
- Automated configuration: The configuration can be easily done from within the same virtualization software that controls the VMs. That programmability allows the virtualization software to move VMs between hosts (servers) and reprogram the vSwitches so that the VM has the same networking capabilities no matter where the VM is running.

### The Physical Data Center Network
Each host is cabled to two different switches in the top of the rack—called Top of Rack (ToR) switches—to provide redundant paths into the LAN. Each ToR switch acts as an access layer switch from a design perspective. Each ToR switch is then cabled to an End of Row (EoR) switch, which acts as a distribution switch and also connects to the rest of the network.

    Cisco Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI) architecture. ACI places the server and switch hardware into racks, but cables the switches with a
    different topology—a topology required for proper operation of the ACI fabric.

## Cloud Computing Services
one characteristic of a cloud service: it must allow self-service provisioning by the consumer of the service.

cloud computing by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST):
- On-demand self-service: The IT consumer chooses when to start and stop using the service, without any direct interaction with the provider of the service. 
- Broad network access: The service must be available from many types of devices and over many types of networks (including the Internet). 
- Resource pooling: The provider creates a pool of resources (rather than dedicating specific servers for use only by certain consumers) and dynamically allocates resources from that pool for each new request from a consumer. 
- Rapid elasticity: To the consumer, the resource pool appears to be unlimited (that is, it expands quickly, so it is called elastic), and the requests for new service are filled quickly. 
- Measured service: The provider can measure the usage and report that usage to the consumer, both for transparency and for billing.

### Private Cloud (On-Premise)

    The world of cloud computing has long used the terms private cloud and public cloud. In more recent years, you may also find references that instead use a different pair of terms for the same ideas, with on-premise meaning private cloud, and cloud meaning public cloud.

self-service aspect of cloud : many cloud computing services use a cloud services catalog. 

### Public Cloud
- Infrastructure as a Service :  consumer receives the use of a VM
- Software as a Service : consumer receives a service with working software. The cloud provider may use VMs, possibly many VMs, to create the service, but those are hidden from the consumer. The cloud provider licenses, installs, and supports whatever software is required. 
- Platform as a Service (PaaS) : a development platform, prebuilt as a service. PaaS includes many more software tools beyond the basic OS, often include an integrated development environment (IDE), which is a set of related tools that enables the developer to write and test code easily. PaaS VMs include continuous integration tools that allow the developer to update code and have that code automatically tested and integrated into a larger software project. 

## WAN Traffic Paths to Reach Cloud Services
You might move an app to the public cloud, but you might keep authentication services on an internal server because those are used by a large number of applications—some internal and some hosted in the public cloud.

Using the Internet works particularly well with SaaS services and a distributed workforce. 

Reasons to use the Internet as the WAN connection to a public cloud service:
- Agility: An enterprise can get started using public cloud without having to wait to order a private WAN connection to the cloud provider because cloud providers support Internet connectivity. 
- Migration: An enterprise can switch its workload from one cloud provider to another more easily because cloud providers all connect to the Internet. 
- Distributed users: The enterprise’s users are distributed and connect to the Internet with their devices (as in the sales SaaS app example).

It also means that you do not have to do any planning before deploying a public cloud service.

Negatives for using the Internet for public cloud access are 
- Security: The Internet is less secure than private WAN connections in that a “man in the middle” can attempt to read the contents of data that passes to/from the public cloud. 
- Capacity: Moving an internal application to the public cloud increases network traffic, so the question of whether the enterprise’s Internet links can handle the additional load needs to be considered. 
- Quality of Service (QoS): The Internet does not provide QoS, whereas private WANs can. Using the Internet may result in a worse user experience than desired because of higher delay (latency), jitter, and packet loss. 
- No WAN SLA: ISPs typically will not provide a service-level agreement (SLA) for WAN performance and availability to all destinations of a network. WAN service providers are much more likely to offer performance and availability SLAs.

### Private WAN and Internet VPN Access to Public Cloud
broad network access : supporting a variety of WAN connections, including the most common enterprise WAN technologies.

The cloud provider can offer a VPN service—that is, the cloud side of the VPN tunnel is implemented by the cloud provider—and the enterprise configures the matching VPN service on one of its own routers. 

Or the enterprise can use its own router inside the cloud provider’s network—a virtual router, running as a VM—and configure VPN services on that router.

     Cisco makes the Cloud Services Router (CSR) to do exactly that: to be a router, but a router that runs as a VM in a cloud service, controlled by the cloud consumer, to do various functions that routers do, including terminating VPNs. 

To make a private Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) VPN or Ethernet WAN connection, the enterprise needs to work with the cloud provider and the WAN provider. 

With MPLS, the enterprise and the cloud provider connect to the same MPLS provider, with the MPLS provider connecting the enterprise and cloud sites. The same basic process happens with Ethernet WAN services, with one or more Ethernet Virtual Connections (EVCs) created between the public WAN and the enterprise.

    the server/virtualization engineers will dictate whether the WAN connection needs to support Layer 2 or Layer 3 connectivity

An Internet VPN would encrypt the data to keep it private. Private WAN connections with MPLS and Ethernet have traditionally been considered secure without encryption, but companies are sometimes encrypting data sent over private WAN connections as well 

Regarding QoS, using an Internet VPN solution still fails to provide QoS because the Internet does not provide QoS. WAN services like MPLS VPN and Ethernet WANs can. WAN providers will look at the QoS markings for frames/packets sent by the customer and apply QoS tools to the traffic as it passes through the service provider’s network.

As for the capacity issue, the concern of planning network capacity exists no matter what type of WAN is used.

Installing the new private WAN connections takes time, delaying when a company gets started in cloud computing. Private WANs typically cost more than using the Internet. If using a WAN connection to one cloud provider (instead of using the Internet), then migrating to a new cloud provider can require another round of private WAN installation.

### Intercloud Exchanges
Intercloud exchange has come to be known as a company that creates a private network as a service. First, an intercloud exchange connects to multiple cloud pro- viders on one side. On the other side, the intercloud connects to cloud consumers.

The consumer keeps the same private WAN links to the intercloud exchange and asks the provider to reconfigure to set up new private WAN connections to the new cloud provider.

As for pros and cons, with an intercloud exchange, you get the same benefits as when connecting with a private WAN connection to a public cloud, but with the additional pro of easier migration to a new cloud provider. The main con is that using an intercloud exchange introduces another company into the mix

||Internet|Internet VPN|MPLS VPN|Ethernet WAN|Intercloud Exchange|
|----|--|--|--|--|--|
|Makes data private|No|Yes|Yes|Yes|Yes|
|Supports QoS|No|No|Yes|Yes|Yes|
|Requires capacity planning|Yes|Yes|Yes|Yes|Yes|
|Eases igration to a new provider|Yes|Yes|No|No|Yes|
|Speeds initial installation|Yes|Yes|No|No|No|

### Branch Offices with Internet and Private WAN
For enterprises that place their Internet connections primarily at the central sites, this public cloud model can cause problems. 

Plan the right capacity for the Internet links; another is to plan capacity for some private WAN connections to the public cloud. Another option exists as well: redesign the enterprise WAN to a small degree, and consider placing direct Internet connections at the branch offices.

This way the traffic flows much more directly. It does not waste the WAN bandwidth for the central site. And broadband Internet connections are relatively inexpensive today compared to private WAN connections.