# Introduction to Controller-Based Networking
## SDN and Controller-Based Networks

### The Data, Control, and Management Planes
#### Data Plane
Data plane (often called the forwarding plane) refers to the tasks that a networking device does to forward a message (receiving data, processing it, and forwarding )

- De-encapsulating and re-encapsulating a packet in a data-link frame (routers, Layer 3 switches)
- Adding or removing an 802.1Q trunking header (routers and switches) 
- Matching an Ethernet frame’s destination Media Access Control (MAC) address to the MAC address table (Layer 2 switches)
- Matching an IP packet’s destination IP address to the IP routing table (routers, Layer 3 switches)
- Encrypting the data and adding a new IP header (for virtual private network [VPN] processing)
- Changing the source or destination IP address (for Network Address Translation [NAT] processing)
- Discarding a message due to a filter (access control lists [ACLs], port security)

#### Control Plane
Control plane refers to any action that controls the data plane. Most of these actions have to do with creating the tables used by the data plane, tables like the IP routing table, an IP Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) table, a switch MAC address table. Control plane processes control what the data plane does .

Traditional networks use both a distributed data plane and a distributed control plane. Each device has a data plane and a control plane, and the network distributes those functions into each individual device.

Common control plane protocols:
- Routing protocols (OSPF, Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol [EIGRP], Routing Information Protocol [RIP], Border Gateway Protocol [BGP])
- IPv4 ARP 
- IPv6 Neighbor Discovery Protocol (NDP) 
- Switch MAC learning
- STP

#### Management Plane
Management plane includes protocols that allow network engineers to manage the devices.
Telnet and Secure Shell (SSH) are two of the most obvious management plane protocols.

#### Cisco Switch Data Plane Internals
First, the switching logic occurs not in the CPU with software, but in an application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC).

Second, the ASIC needs to perform table lookup in the MAC address table, so for fast table lookup, the switch uses a specialized type of memory to store the equivalent of the MAC address table: ternary content-addressable memory (TCAM). TCAM memory does not require the ASIC to execute loops through an algorithm to search the table. Instead, the ASIC can feed the fields to be matched, like a MAC address value, into the TCAM, and the TCAM returns the matching table entry, without a need to run a search algorithm.

IOS runs in the CPU and uses RAM. Most of the control and management plane functions run in IOS. The data plane function (and the control plane function of MAC learning) happens in the ASIC.

### Controllers and Software-Defined Architecture
move parts of the control plane work into software that runs as a centralized application called a controller.

### Controllers and Centralized Control
Traditional control plane processes use a distributed architecture.

oftware-defined architecture often uses a centralized architecture, with a centralized control plane, with its foundations in a service called a controller.


A controller, or SDN controller, centralizes the control of the networking devices. The degree of control, and the type of control, varies widely. The controller sits anywhere in the network that has IP reachability to the devices in the network.

#### The Southbound Interface
An interface between the controller and network devices to be controlled. 


The overall goal is network programmability, so the interface moves away from being only a protocol. An SBI often includes a protocol, so that the controller and devices can communicate, but it often includes an application programming interface (API). API often exists as usable code—functions, variables, and data structures.

#### The Northbound Interface
The controller itself can create a centralized repository of all this useful information about the network.


A controller’s northbound interface (NBI) opens the controller so its data and functions can be used by other programs, enabling network programmability, with much quicker development. Programs can pull information from the controller, using the controller’s APIs. The NBIs also enable programs to use the controller’s capabilities to program flows into the devices using the controller’s SBIs.

    REST (Representational State Transfer) describes a type of API that allows applications to sit on different hosts, using HTTP messages to transfer data over the API. The API needs a way to send the data back and forth over an IP network, and RESTful APIs meet that need. REST APIs will ask for and receive structured data

To summarize : The networking devices still exist and still forward data, but the control plane functions and locations can change dramatically. 

## Examples of Network Programmability and SDN

- OpenDaylight Controller 
- Cisco Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI)
- Cisco APIC Enterprise Module (APIC-EM)

### OpenDaylight and OpenFlow

Open Networking Foundation (ONF) is billed as Open SDN.

The ONF model of SDN features OpenFlow. OpenFlow defines the concept of a controller along with an IP-based SBI between the controller and the network devices. Just as important, OpenFlow defines a standard idea of what a switch’s capabilities are, based on the ASICs and TCAMs commonly used in switches today. (That standardized idea of what a switch does is called a switch abstraction.) An OpenFlow switch can act as a Layer 2 switch, a Layer 3 switch, or in different ways and with great flexibility beyond the traditional model of a Layer 2/3 switch.

The Open SDN model centralizes most control plane functions, applications may use any APIs (NBIs) supported on the controller; however, it calls for OpenFlow as the SBI protocol. Additionally, the networking devices need
to be switches that support OpenFlow.

### The OpenDaylight Controller
The OpenDaylight open-source SDN controller is one of the more successful SDN controller platforms to emerge from the consolidation process. It began as a separate project but now exists as a project managed by the Linux Foundation.

It offers a variety of SBIs listed in the lower part of the controller box: OpenFlow, NetConf, PCEP, BGP-LS, and OVSDB; many more exist. The ODL project has enough participants so that it includes a large variety of options, including multiple SBIs, not just OpenFlow. A vendor can then take ODL, use the parts that make sense for that vendor, add to it, and create a commercial ODL controller.

### The Cisco Open SDN Controller (OSC)
A commercial version of the OpenDaylight. Cisco no longer produces and sells the Cisco OSC.

## Cisco Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI)
Cisco’s current SDN offerings of ACI in the data center, Software-Defined Access (SDA) in the enterprise campus, and Software-Defined WAN (SD-WAN) in the enterprise WAN.

ACI set about to create data center networking with the flexibility and automation built into the operational model. Old data center networking models with a lot of per-physicalinterface configuration on switches and routers were just poor models for the rapid pace of change and automated nature of modern data centers. 

### ACI Physical Design: Spine and Leaf
The Cisco ACI uses a specific physical switch topology called spine and leaf. The data center could be made standard and consistent. But what particular standard and consistent topology? Cisco decided on the spine and leaf design, also called a Clos network. The links between switches can be single links or multiple parallel links.

- Each leaf switch must connect to every spine switch. 
- Each spine switch must connect to every leaf switch. 
- Leaf switches cannot connect to each other. 
- Spine switches cannot connect to each other.
- Endpoints connect only to the leaf switches.

Endpoints connect only to leaf switches and never to spine switches.
The endpoints can be connections to devices outside the data center, like the router on the left. By volume, most of the endpoints will be either physical servers running a native OS or servers running virtualization software with numbers of VMs and containers.

Note that multiple leaf switches connecting to a single hardware endpoint like a Cisco Unified Computing System (UCS) server. Depending on the design requirements, each UCS might connect to at least two leaf switches, both for redundancy and for greater capacity.

The model that Cisco defines for ACI uses a concept of endpoints and policies. The endpoints are the VMs, containers, or even traditional servers with the OS running directly on the hardware. ACI then uses several constructs as implemented via the Application Policy Infrastructure Controller (APIC), the software that serves as the centralized controller for ACI.


ACI uses an intent-based networking (IBN) model . With that model, the engineer, or some automation program, defines the policies and intent for which endpoints should be allowed to communicate and which should not. Then the controller determines what that means for this network at this moment in time, depending on where the endpoints are right now.
For instance, when starting the VMs, the virtualization software would create (via the APIC) several endpoint groups (EPGs). The routers that connect to the network external to the data center should be able to send packets to all web servers, but not to the app servers or DB servers.

To make it all work, ACI uses a centralized controller called the Application Policy Infrastructure Controller (APIC). It is the controller that creates application policies for the data center infrastructure. The APIC takes the intent (EPGs, policies, and so on), which completely changes the operational model away from configuring VLANs, trunks, EtherChannels, ACLs, and so on.

### Cisco APIC Enterprise Module (APIC-EM)
APIC-EM assumes the use of the same traditional switches and routers with their familiar distributed data and control planes. Add the benefits of network programmability with a centralized controller while keeping the same traditional switches and routers in place.

Adding a centralized controller with powerful northbound APIs opens many possibilities for customers/operators. It includes these applications:

- Topology map: The application discovers and displays the topology of the network. 
- Path Trace: The user supplies a source and destination device, and the application shows the path through the network, along with details about the forwarding decision at each step.
- Plug and Play: This application provides Day 0 installation support so that you can unbox a new device and make it IP reachable through automation in the controller.
- Easy QoS: With a few simple decisions at the controller, you can configure complex QoS features at each device.

APIC-EM does not directly program the data or control planes, but it does interact with the management plane via Telnet, SSH, and/or SNMP. It can interrogate and learn the configuration state and operational state of each device, and it can reconfigure each device.

Many of the functions of APIC-EM have become core features of the Cisco DNA Center (DNAC) product.


### Traditional Versus Controller-Based Networks

- Northbound APIs and their underlying data models make it much easier to automate functions versus traditional networks.
- The robust data created by controllers makes it possible to automate functions that were not easily automated without controllers.
- The new reimagined software defined networks that use new operational models simplify operations, with automation resulting in more consistent configuration and less errors.
- Centralized collection of operational data at controllers allows the application of modern data analytics to networking operational data, providing actionable insights that were likely not noticeable with the former model.
- Time required to complete projects is reduced. 
- New operational models use external inputs, like considering time-of-day, day-of-week, and network load.

the controller determines many device-specific details: 
- The network engineer does not need to think about every command on every device. 
- The controller configures the devices with consistent and streamlined settings.
- The result: faster and more consistent changes with fewer issues.

The controller’s northbound APIs allowed third-party applications to automatically configure the network : 
- Uses new and improved operational models that allow the configuration of the network rather than per-device configuration
- Enables automation through northbound APIs that provide robust methods and modeldriven data
- Configures the network devices through southbound APIs, resulting in more consistent device configuration, fewer errors, and less time spent troubleshooting the network
- Enables a DevOps approach to networks