# REST-Based APIs
REpresentational State Transfer (REST) include six attributes :
* Client/server architecture 
* Stateless operation - API request and reply does not use any other past history
* Clear statement of cacheable/uncacheable - any resource requested via an API call have a clear method by which to mark the resource as cacheable or not. Cacheable resources are marked with a timeframe so that the client knows when to ask for a new copy
* Uniform interface 
* Layered
* Code-on-demand

### Data and Variables
* Simple Variables
* Lists : list1 = ["g0/0", "g0/1", "g0/2"]
* Dictionaries : dict1 = {"config_speed":'auto', "config_duplex":"auto", "config_ip":"10.1.1.1"}

## REST APIs and HTTP
HTTP’s logic matches some of the concepts defined more generally for REST APIs. It has same principles such as : client/server model; it uses a stateless operational model; and it includes headers that clearly mark objects as cacheable or not cacheable. It also includes <b>verbs</b>

|Action|CRUD Term|REST (HTTP) Verb|
|---|---|---|
||Create|POST|
||Read|GET|
||Update|PATCH, PUT|
||Delete|DELETE|

URI in REST API Call :
protocol://hostname/path?parameters

## Data Serialization and JSON
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) :  a data serialization language

* JSON
* XML eXtensible Markup Language - has  features to define variables, values, and data structures
* YAML - focuses on the data model (structure) details, the easiest to read. Ansible makes extensive use of YAML files. YAML denotes variables in double curly brackets: {{ }}

### Interpreting JSON
* Key:Value Pair : Each and every colon identifies one key:value pair, with the key before the colon and the value after the colon.
* Key: Text, inside double quotes, before the colon, used as the name that references a value.
* Value : The item after the colon that represents the value of the key, which can be {Text, Numeric, Array, Object}
* Multiple Pairs: When listing multiple key:value pairs, separate the pairs with a comma at the end of each pair (except the last pair).

{ } - Object
<br>[ ] - Array