# Understanding Ansible, Puppet, and Chef
## Device Configuration Challenges and Solutions
<b>configuration drift</b> - an effect in which the configuration drifts away from the intended configuration over time.

* on-device manual configuration process does not track change history: which lines changed, what changed on each line, what old configuration was removed, who changed the configuration, when each change was made.
* External systems used by good systems management processes, like trouble ticketing and change management software, may record details. However, those sit outside the configuration and require analysis to figure out what changed. They also rely on humans to follow the operational processes consistently and correctly
* Referring to historical data in change management systems works poorly if a device has gone through multiple configuration changes over a period of time .

Configuration management tools use version control.
Engineers should make changes by editing the associated configuration files in the centralized repository. The configuration management tool can then be directed to copy or apply the configuration to the device.
Using the configuration management tools is still possible to log in to each device and make manual changes on each device.

Configuration management tools can monitor device configurations to discover when the device configuration differs from the intended ideal configuration, and then either reconfigure the device or notify the network engineering staff to make the change. This feature might be called <i>configuration monitoring</i> or <i>configuration enforcement</i>

### Configuration Provisioning
provision or deploy changes to the configuration once made by changing files in the configuration management system. As one of the primary functions of a configuration management tool, you would likely see features like :
*  implement configuration changes in one device after someone has edited the device’s centralized configuration file
* choose which subset of devices to configure: all devices, types with a given attribute (such as those of a particular role), or just one device, based on attributes and logic
* determine if each change was accepted or rejected, and to use logic to react differently in each case
* revert to the original configuration
* validate the change now (without actually making the change) to determine whether the change will work or not when attempted
* check the configuration after the process completes to confirm that the configuration management tool’s intended configuration does match the device’s
* use logic to choose whether to save the running-config to startup-config 
* represent configuration files as templates and variables so that devices with similar roles can use the same template
* store the logic steps in a file

### Configuration Templates and Variables
devices in the same role, the configurations are likely similar.
A configuration can be separated into the parts in common to all devices in that role (the template) versus the parts unique to any one
device (the variables).

Ansible uses the Jinja2 language for templates :

    hostname {{hostname}} 
    interface GigabitEthernet0/0 
      ip address {{address1}} {{mask1}} 
      ip ospf {{OSPF_PID}} area {{area}}
    router ospf {{OSPF_PID}} 
    router-id {{RID}}

<br>

    hostname: BR1 
    address1: 10.1.1.1 
    mask1: 255.255.255.0 
    RID: 1.1.1.1 
    area: '11'
    OSPF_PID: '1'

## Ansible, Puppet, and Chef Basics
All three emerged as part of the transition from hardware-based servers to virtualized servers, which greatly increased the number of servers and created the need for software automation to create, configure, and remove VMs 

### Ansible

* <b>Playbooks</b>: These files provide actions and logic about what Ansible should do. 
* <b>Inventory</b>: These files provide device hostnames along with information about each device, like device roles, so Ansible can perform functions for subsets of the inventory
* <b>Templates</b>: Using Jinja2 language, the templates represent a device’s configuration but with variables.
* <b>Variables</b>: Using YAML, a file can list variables that Ansible will substitute into templates

Agentless architecture : Ansible does not rely on any code (agent) running on the network device. Instead, Ansible relies on features typical in network devices, namely SSH and/or NETCONF, to make changes and extract information. 

Ansible can be described as using a push model rather than a pull model (like Puppet and Chef) with the control node seen as pushing the configuration to the device.

As with all the tools, Ansible can do both configuration provisioning (configuring devices after changes are made in the files) and configuration monitoring (checking to find out whether the device config matches the ideal configuration on the control node). However,
Ansible’s architecture more naturally fits with configuration provisioning. 

### Puppet
Install on a Linux server called a Puppet master. 

* <b>Manifest</b>: This is a human-readable text file on the Puppet master, using a language defined by Puppet, used to define the desired configuration state of a device.
* <b>Resource, Class, Module</b>: These terms refer to components of the manifest, with the largest component (module) being composed of smaller classes, which are in turn composed of resources.
* <b>Templates</b>: Using a Puppet domain-specific language, these files allow Puppet to generate manifests (and modules, classes, and resources) by substituting variables into the template.

Ansible’s playbooks use an imperative language, whereas Puppet uses a declarative language. <br>With Ansible, the playbook will list tasks and choices based on those results, like “Configure all branch routers in these locations, and if errors occur for any device, do these extra tasks for that device.” Puppet manifests instead declare the end state that a device should have: “This branch router should have the configuration in this file by the end of the process.” The manifest, built by the engineer, defines the end state, and Puppet has the job to cause the device to have that configuration, without being told the specific set of
steps to take.

Puppet typically uses an agent-based architecture for network device support. Some network devices enable Puppet support via an on-device agent—think of it as another feature configurable on the device. However, not every Cisco OS supports Puppet agents, so Puppet solves that problem using a proxy agent running on some external host (called agentless operation). The external agent then uses SSH to communicate with the network
device.

Puppet uses a pull model to make that configuration appear in the device.

* creates and edits all the files on the Puppet server
* configures and enables the on-device agent or a proxy agent
* pulls manifest details from the server
* If the agent device’s configuration should be updated, the Puppet agent performs additional pulls to get all required detail

### Chef
Chef as a server (called server-client mode), with multiple Chef workstations used by the engineering staff to build Chef files that are stored on the Chef server. However, you can
also run Chef in standalone mode (called Chef Zero)

* <b>Resource</b>: The configuration objects whose state is managed by Chef; for instance, a set of configuration commands for a network device—analogous to the ingredients in a recipe in a cookbook
* <b>Recipe</b>: The Chef logic applied to resources to determine when, how, and whether to act against the resources—analogous to a recipe in a cookbook
* <b>Cookbooks</b>: A set of recipes about the same kinds of work, grouped together for easier management and sharing
* <b>Runlist</b>: An ordered list of recipes that should be run against a given device

Chef uses an architecture similar to Puppet. For network devices, each managed device (called a Chef node or Chef client) runs an agent. The agent performs configuration monitoring in that the client pulls recipes and resources from the Chef server and then adjusts its configuration to stay in sync with the details in those recipes and runlists. Note however that Chef requires on-device Chef client code, and many Cisco devices do not support a Chef client, so you will likely see more use of Ansible and Puppet for Cisco device configuration management .

### Summary of Configuration Management Tools

|Action|Ansible|Puppet|Chef|
|---|---|---|---|
|Term for the file that lists actions|Playbook|Manifest|Recipe, Runlist|
|Protocol to network device|SSH, NETCONF|HTTP (REST|HTTP (REST|
|Uses agent or agentless model|Agentless|Agent*|Agent|
|Push or pull model|Push|Pull|Pull|