# Advanced IPv4 Access Control Lists
## Extended Numbered IP Access Control Lists
Extended ACLs differ from standard ACLs mostly because of the larger variety of packet header fields that can be used to match a packet. One extended ACE (ACL statement) can examine multiple parts of the packet headers, requiring that all the parameters be matched correctly to match that one ACE.
### Matching the Protocol, Source IP, and Destination IP
Extended ACL access-list command requires three matching parameters: the IP protocol type, the source IP address, and the destination IP address.

For the protocol type, you simply use a keyword, such as tcp, udp, or icmp, Or you can use the keyword ip, which means “all IPv4 packets.”

    When matching a specific IP address, the extended ACL requires the use of the host keyword.

In an extended ACL access-list command, all the matching parameters must match the packet for the packet to match the command.

### Matching TCP and UDP Port Numbers
The port numbers identify the application that sends or receives the data.

When an extended ACL command includes either the tcp or udp keyword, that command can optionally reference the source and/or destination port. To make these comparisons, the syntax uses keywords for equal, not equal, less than, greater than, and for a range of port numbers. In addition, the command can use either the literal decimal port numbers or more convenient keywords for some well-known application ports.

Some port matching keywords include : 

    eq : =
    ne : !=
    lt : < 
    gt : >
    range : x to y 


- Place extended ACLs as close as possible to the source of the packets that will be filtered. Filtering close to the source of the packets saves some bandwidth.
- Remember that all fields in one access-list command must match a packet for the packet to be considered to match that access-list statement.
- Use numbers of 100–199 and 2000–2699 on the access-list commands; no one number is inherently better than another.

## Named ACLs and ACL Editing
Standard numbered ACLs can match the same fields as a standard named ACL, and extended numbered ACLs can match the same fields as an extended named ACL.

- Using names instead of numbers to identify the ACL, making it easier to remember the reason for the ACL
- Using ACL subcommands, not global commands, to define the action and matching parameters
- Using ACL editing features that allow the CLI user to delete individual lines from the ACL and insert new lines


<code>ip access-list standard name</code> enters ACL configuration mode.  This command defines whether an ACL is a standard or extended ACL and defines the name.


    Named ACLs allow the user to delete and add new lines to the ACL 


### Editing ACLs Using Sequence Numbers
ACL editing feature uses an ACL sequence number that is added to each ACL permit or deny statement, with the numbers representing the sequence of statements in the ACL.

- <b>New configuration style for numbered</b>: Numbered ACLs use a configuration style like named ACLs, as well as the traditional style, for the same ACL; the new style is required to perform advanced ACL editing. 
- <b>Deleting single lines</b>: An individual ACL permit or deny statement can be deleted with a no sequence-number subcommand. 
- <b>Inserting new lines</b>: Newly added permit and deny commands can be configured with a sequence number before the deny or permit command, dictating the location of the statement within the ACL. 
- <b>Automatic sequence numbering</b>: IOS adds sequence numbers to commands as you configure them, even if you do not include the sequence numbers.

Both numbered and named ACLs must use the same overall configuration style and commands used for named ACLs.

### Numbered ACL Configuration Versus Named ACL Configuration
IOS supports the traditional method, using the access-list global commands. IOS also supports the numbered ACL configuration with commands just like named ACLs.

IOS always stores numbered ACLs with the original style of configuration, as global access-list commands, no matter which method is used to configure the ACL.

### ACL Implementation Considerations
- Place extended ACLs as close as possible to the source of the packet. This strategy allows ACLs to discard the packets early.
- Place standard ACLs as close as possible to the destination of the packet. This strategy avoids the mistake with standard ACLs (which match the source IPv4 address only) of unintentionally discarding packets that did not need to be discarded.
- Place more specific statements early in the ACL. 
- Disable an ACL from its interface (using the no ip access-group interface subcommand) before making changes to the ACL.

Standard ACLs look only at the source IP address, they tend to filter more than you want filtered when placed close to the source. 

Cisco recommends that you disable the ACLs on the interfaces before you change the statements in the list. By doing so, you avoid issues with the ACL during an interim state. First, if you delete an entire ACL and leave the IP ACL enabled on an interface with the ip access-group command, IOS does not filter any packets (that was not always the case in far earlier IOS versions)! As soon as you add one ACL command to that enabled ACL, however, IOS starts filtering packets based on that ACL. Those interim ACL configurations could cause problems.

### Sample Configuration 

    ! Step 1: The 3-line Standard Numbered IP ACL is configured. 
    R1# configure terminal
    Enter configuration commands, one per line. End with CNTL/Z. 
    R1(config)# ip access-list standard 24 
    R1(config-std-nacl)# permit 10.1.1.0 0.0.0.255
    R1(config-std-nacl)# permit 10.1.2.0 0.0.0.255
    R1(config-std-nacl)# permit 10.1.3.0 0.0.0.255 
    
    ! Step 2: Displaying the ACL's contents, without leaving configuration mode. 
    R1(config-std-nacl)# do show ip access-lists 24 
    Standard IP access list 24
        10 permit 10.1.1.0, wildcard bits 0.0.0.255 
        20 permit 10.1.2.0, wildcard bits 0.0.0.255 
        30 permit 10.1.3.0, wildcard bits 0.0.0.255

    ! Step 3: Still in ACL 24 configuration mode, the line with sequence number 20 is deleted.
    R1(config-std-nacl)# no 20

    ! Step 4: Displaying the ACL's contents again, without leaving configuration mode. ! Note that line number 20 is no longer listed. 
    R1(config-std-nacl)#do show ip access-lists 24 
    Standard IP access list 24
        10 permit 10.1.1.0, wildcard bits 0.0.0.255 
        30 permit 10.1.3.0, wildcard bits 0.0.0.255

    ! Step 5: Inserting a new first line in the ACL. 
    R1(config-std-nacl)# 5 deny 10.1.1.1

    ! Step 6: Displaying the ACL's contents one last time, with the new statement !(sequence number 5) listed first. 
    R1(config-std-nacl)# do show ip access-lists 24 
    Standard IP access list 24 
        5 deny 10.1.1.1
        10 permit 10.1.1.0, wildcard bits 0.0.0.255
        30 permit 10.1.3.0, wildcard bits 0.0.0.255
    
    ! Step 7: A configuration snippet for ACL 24. 
    R1# show running-config
    ! The only lines shown are the lines from ACL 24 
    access-list 24 deny 10.1.1.1
    access-list 24 permit 10.1.1.0 0.0.0.255 
    access-list 24 permit 10.1.3.0 0.0.0.255

    ! Step 8: Adding a new access-list 24 global command 
    R1# configure terminal
    Enter configuration commands, one per line. End with CNTL/Z. 
    R1(config)# access-list 24 permit 10.1.4.0 0.0.0.255 
    R1(config)# ^Z

    ! Step 9: Displaying the ACL's contents again, with sequence numbers. Note that even the new statement has been automatically assigned a sequence number. 
    R1# show ip access-lists 24 
    Standard IP access list 24 
    5 deny 10.1.1.1
    10 permit 10.1.1.0, wildcard bits 0.0.0.255 
    30 permit 10.1.3.0, wildcard bits 0.0.0.255 
    40 permit 10.1.4.0, wildcard bits 0.0.0.255

    ! Step 10: The numbered ACL config remains in old-style configuration commands. 
    R1# show running-config
    ! The only lines shown are the lines from ACL 24 
    access-list 24 deny 10.1.1.1 
    access-list 24 permit 10.1.1.0 0.0.0.255 
    access-list 24 permit 10.1.3.0 0.0.0.255
    access-list 24 permit 10.1.4.0 0.0.0.255