# Security Architectures
## Security Terminology
assumption that every user is known, every user is approved to access everything on the network, and every user will use the available resources exactly according to some corporate guidelines.

If the enterprise offers wireless connectivity to its employees (and guests), it might also unknowingly offer its wireless access to people who are within range of the signals.

- a vulnerability is anything that can be considered to be a weakness that can compromise the security of something else, such as the integrity of data or how a system performs.
- an exploit is a tool that can be used to exploit a vulnerability. An exploit is not very effective if it is used against anything other than the targeted weakness or vulnerability.
- a threa  is an actual potential to break in, destroy, steal, or otherwise modify something without permission.
-  mitigation techniques : techniques you can leverage to counteract or prevent the malicious activity

## Common Security Threats
### Attacks That Spoof Addresses
Spoofing attacks focus on one vulnerability; addresses and services tend to be implicitly trusted. Attacks usually take place by replacing expected values with spoofed or fake values. Address spoofing attacks can be simple and straightforward, where one address value is substituted for another.

If the spoofed address exists, then an unsuspecting host with that address will receive the packet. If the address
does not exist, the packet will be forwarded and then dropped further out in the network.

An attacker can send spoofed MAC addresses too, to add false information to the forwarding tables used by Layer 2 switches or ARP tables used by other hosts and routers. DHCP requests with spoofed MAC addresses can also be sent to a legitimate DHCP server, filling its address lease table and leaving no free IP addresses for normal use.

### Denial-of-Service Attacks
TCP connection begins with the malicious user sending a SYN flag to the server, but the source IP address is replaced with a fake address. The server adds the TCP connection to its table of client connections and replies to the fake address with a SYN-ACK. Because the fake address is not involved in the TCP connection, there is no ACK reply to complete the TCP three-way handshake. The incomplete connection stays in the server’s table until it eventually times out and is removed. During this time, the attacker can try to open many, many more abnormal connections at such a rate that the server’s connection table fills. At that point, the server is no longer able to maintain TCP connections with legitimate users, so their business transactions all halt.

When an attacker is able to deplete a system resource, services and systems become unavailable or crash. This is called a denial-of-service (DoS) attack because it denies service to legitimate users or operations. DoS attacks can involve something as simple as ICMP echo (ping) packets, a flood of UDP packets, and TCP connections, such as the TCP SYN flood attack previously described. Such attacks can be successful provided a system has a vulnerability with the protocol or type of traffic that is exploited.

Atackers can carry the DoS idea even further by enlisting many other systems to participate. To do this, the attacker sets up a master control computer somewhere on the Internet. Next, many computers must first be infected with malicious code or malware by leveraging vulnerabilities present in those machines. Each machine then silently becomes a “bot,” appearing to operate normally, while awaiting commands from the master control. When the time comes for an attack to begin, the master control sends a command to every bot and tells it to initiate a denial-of-service attack against a single target host. This is called a distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack because the attack is distributed across a large number of bots, all flooding or attacking the same target.

### Reflection and Amplification Attacks
The goal is to force the target to deal with the spoofed traffic and send return traffic toward a nonexistent source. The attacker does not care where the return traffic goes or that it cannot be delivered successfully.

In a somewhat related attack, the attacker again sends packets with a spoofed source address toward a live host. However, the host is not the intended target; the goal is to get the host to reflect the exchange toward the spoofed address that is the target. This is known as a reflection attack as illustrated in Figure 4-6, and the host reflecting the traffic toward the target is called the reflector.

If an attacker is able to send a small amount of traffic to a reflector and leverage a protocol or service to generate a large volume of traffic toward a target, then an amplification attack has occurred.

Some mechanisms of DNS and NTP have been exploited in the past to set new records for enormous bandwidth consumption during an amplification attack.

### Man-in-the-Middle Attacks
Sometimes an attacker might want to eavesdrop on data that passes from one machine to another, avoiding detection. A man-in-the-middle attack does just that, by allowing the attacker to quietly wedge itself into the communication path as an intermediary between two target systems.
One type of man-in-the-middle attack exploits the ARP table that each host maintains to communicate with other hosts on its local network segment.

The goal is for the attacker to send the last ARP reply so that any listening host will update its ARP table. A poisoned system will blindly forward traffic to the attacker’s MAC address, which now masquerades as the destination.

#### Address Spoofing Attack Summary
|Goal|DoS/DDoS|Reflection|Amplification|Man-inthe-Middle|
|--|--|--|--|--|
|Exhaust a system service or resource; crash the target system|Yes|No|No|No|
|Trick an unwitting accomplice host to send traffic to target|No|Yes|Yes|No|
|Eavesdrop on traffic|No|No|No|Yes|
|Modify traffic passing through|No|No|No|Yes|

### Reconnaissance Attacks
Used to identify some vulnerabilities so the attack can be focused and more effective. A reconnaissance attack can be used to discover more details about the target and its systems prior to an actual attack.

Common tools to uncover public details like who owns a domain and what IP address ranges are used. For example, the nslookup command exists in many operating systems and can perform a DNS lookup to resolve an IP address from a fully qualified domain name. If an attacker knows the domain name of a business, nslookup can reveal the owner of the domain and the IP address space registered to it. The whois and dig commands are complementary tools that can query DNS information to reveal detailed information about domain owners, contact information, mail servers, authoritative name servers, and so on.

Then the attacker can progress to using ping sweeps to send pings to each IP address in the target range. Hosts that answer the ping sweep then become live targets. Port scanning tools can then sweep through a range of UDP and TCP ports to see if a target host answers on any port numbers. Any replies indicate that a corresponding service is running on the target host.
Keep in mind that a reconnaissance attack is not a true attack because nothing is exploited as a result. 

### Buffer Overflow Attacks
Data might be stored in unexpected memory locations if a buffer is allowed to fill beyond its limit. An attacker can exploit this condition by sending data that is larger than expected. If a vulnerability exists, the target system might store that data, overflowing its buffer into another area of memory, eventually crashing a service or the entire system. The attacker might also be able to specially craft the large message by inserting malicious code in it. If the target system stores that data as a result of a buffer overflow, then it can potentially run the malicious code without realizing.

### Malware
malicious software or malware:
- a trojan horse is malicious software that is hidden and packaged inside other software that looks normal and legitimate. Trojan horse malware can spread from one computer to another only through user interaction.
- viruses are malware that can propagate between systems more readily.  To spread, virus software must inject itself into another application, then rely on users to transport the infected application software to other victims.
- a worm replicates itself and spreads to other systems through their vulnerabilities, then replicates and spreads again and again. It is able to propagate to and infect other systems on its own. An attacker develops worm software and deposits it on a system.

### Human Vulnerabilities
social engineering, where human trust and social behaviors can become security vulnerabilities.

- Phishing is a technique that attackers use to lure victims into visiting malicious websites. The idea is to either disguise the invitation as something legitimate, frighten victims into following a link, or otherwise deceive users into browsing content that convinces them to enter their confidential information.
- Spear phishing targets a group of similar users
- Whaling is similar but targets high-profile individuals
- Phishing can also occur over traditional communications, such as voice calls (vishing) and SMS text messages (smishing).
- Pharming compromising the services that direct users toward a well-known or trusted website. For instance, an attacker can compromise a DNS service or edit local hosts files to change the entry for a legitimate site. 
- watering hole attack , an attacker determines which users frequently visit a site; then that site is compromised and malware is deposited there. The malware infects only the target users who visit the site, while leaving other users unscathed.

### Password Vulnerabilities
An attacker can launch an online attack by actually entering each password guess as the system prompts for user credentials. In contrast, an offline attack occurs when the attacker is able to retrieve the encrypted or hashed passwords ahead of time, then goes offline to an external computer and uses software there to repeatedly attempt to recover the actual password.

- dictionary attacks
-  brute-force attack

An enterprise should implement password policies for all users. Such a policy might include guidelines that require a long password string made up of a combination of upper- and lowercase characters along with numbers and some special characters. The goal is to require all passwords to be complex strings that are difficult to guess or reveal by a password attack. As well, password management should require all passwords to be changed periodically so that even lengthy brute-force attacks would not be able to recover a password before it is changed again .

### Password Alternatives
Multifactor credentials:
two-factor credentials as “something you have” (a dynamic changing cryptographic key or a text message containing a time-limited code) and “something you know” (a password).

A digital certificate can serve as one alternative factor. Certificates must be granted and digitally signed by a trusted certificate authority (CA). As long as the services used by the enterprise know and trust the CA, then individual certificates signed by that CA can be trusted as well.
Digital certificates are also time sensitive, as each is approved for a specific time range. Once a certificate expires, any attempts to authenticate with it will be rejected. Certificates can also be revoked. 

Each digital certificate must also carry proof of possession to show that it was truly granted to the user who presents it during authentication. This proof is built into the encrypted certificate content, as a result of combining public keys that the user’s machine and the authentication server can publicly share, along with private keys that each party keeps private and secret.

Biometric credentials provide a factor that represents “something you are.”  A user’s fingerprint can be scanned and used as an authentication factor. Other examples include face recognition, palm prints, voice recognition, iris recognition, and retinal scans. Some methods can be trusted more than others. Sometimes facial recognition systems can be fooled when presented with photographs or masks of trusted individuals. Injuries and the aging process can also alter biometric patterns such as fingerprints, facial shapes, and iris patterns. To help mitigate potential weaknesses, multiple biometric credentials can be collected and used to authenticate users as well.

## Controlling and Monitoring User Access
You can manage user activity to and through systems with authentication, authorization, and accounting (AAA, also pronounced “triple-A”) mechanisms.

- Authentication: Who is the user? 
- Authorization: What is the user allowed to do?
- Accounting: What did the user do?

A more scalable solution is to leverage AAA functions that are centralized, standardized, resilient, and flexible. For example, a centralized authentication server can contain a database of all possible users and their passwords, as well as policies to authorize user activities.

AAA servers can also support multifactor user credentials and more. Cisco implements AAA services in its Identity Services Engine (ISE) platform.
AAA servers usually support the following two protocols to communicate with enterprise resources:
- TACACS+: A Cisco proprietary protocol that separates each of the AAA functions. Communication is secure and encrypted over TCP port 49.
- RADIUS: A standards-based protocol that combines authentication and authorization into a single resource. Communication uses UDP ports 1812 and 1813 (accounting) but is not completely encrypted.

Both TACACS+ and RADIUS are arranged as a client/server model. In the AAA client role, the switch is often called Network Access Device (NAD) or Network Access Server (NAS). 

The switch challenges the user for credentials, then passes the credentials along to the AAA server. In simple terms, if the user passes authentication, the AAA server returns an “accept” message to the switch. If the AAA server requires additional credentials, as in multifactor authentication, it returns a “challenge” message to the switch. Otherwise, a “reject” message is returned, denying access to the user .

### Developing a Security Program to Educate Users
An effective security program should have the following basic elements:
- User awareness: All users should be made aware of the need for data confidentiality , as well as their own credentials and personal information. They should also be made aware of potential threats, schemes to mislead, and proper procedures to report security incidents. 
 - User training: periodic formal training and develop and publish formal security policies
 - Physical access control: Infrastructure locations should remain securely locked. Badge access to sensitive locations is a scalable solution, offering an audit trail of identities and timestamps when access is granted.