# Securing Network Devices
## Securing IOS Passwords
### Encrypting Older IOS Passwords with service password-encryption
Passwords exist in the configuration file as clear text.

<code>service password-encryption</code> global configuration command encrypts passwords that are normally held as clear text, specifically the passwords for these commands:

    password password (console or vty mode) 
    username name password password (global)
    enable password password (global)

IOS adds the encryption or encoding type of “7” to the command, which specifically refers to passwords encrypted with the service password-encryption command. (IOS considers the clear-text passwords to be type 0; some commands list the 0, and some do not.)

<code>no service password-encryption </code> global command does not immediately decrypt the passwords back to their clear-text state, the passwords remain encrypted until you change a password.

### Encoding the Enable Passwords with Hashes

<code>enable password password</code> command stored the password as clear text, and the <code>service password-encryption</code> command encrypted the
password in a way that was easily decrypted.

Use the <code>enable secret <i>password</i></code> global command, and ignore the enable password password global command.

- Both commands configured: Users must use the password in the enable secret password command (and ignore the enable password password command).
- Only one command configured: Use the password in that one command. 
- Neither command configured (default): Console users move directly to enable mode without a password prompt; Telnet and SSH users are rejected with no option to supply an enable password.

enable secret command protects the password value by never even storing the clear-text password, it  uses a hash function called Message Digest 5 (MD5) and stores the hash value. show running-config list the encryption type 5 . 

    you can delete the enable secret password using the no enable secret command, without even having to enter the password value. You can also overwrite the old password by just repeating the enable secret command. 

### Improved Hashes for Cisco’s Enable Secret
Researchers have found creative ways to attack the MD5 algorithm, making MD5 less challenging to crack. OS now supports two alternative algorithm types in the more recent router and switch IOS images. Both use an SHA-256 hash instead of MD5. 
|Command|Type|Algorithm|
|--|--|--|
|enable [algorithm-type md5] secret password|5|MD5|
|enable algorithm-type sha256 secret password|8|SHA-256|
|enable algorithm-type scrypt secret password|9|SHA-256|

### Encoding the Passwords for Local Usernames
Some IOS features require that the router knows a clear-text password via the username command (for instance, when performing some common authentication methods for serial links called PAP and CHAP)

### Controlling Password Attacks with ACLs
IOS has a feature that uses ACLs to prevent the attacker from even seeing a password prompt. IOS can apply an ACL to the vty lines, filtering the addresses that can telnet or SSH into the router or switch.

    line vty 0 4 
        login
        password cisco 
        access-class 3 in

    ! Next command is a global command that matches IPv4 packets with  a source address that begins with 10.1.1.
    access-list 3 permit 10.1.1.0 0.0.0.255

IOS also supports using ACLs to filter outbound Telnet and SSH connections.  With an outbound vty filter, IOS will apply ACL logic if the user tries the telnet or ssh commands to connect out of the local device to another device.

To configure an outbound VTY ACL, use the <code>access-class acl out</code> command in VTY configuration mode. Once configured, the router filters any attempts made by current vty users to use the telnet and ssh commands to initiate new connections to other devices.

    standard IP ACL listed in the access-class command actually looks at the destination IP address, and not the source. That is, it filters based on the device to which the telnet or ssh command is trying to connect.

## Firewalls and Intrusion Prevention Systems 
### Traditional Firewalls
Traditionally , a firewall sits in the forwarding path of all packets. In its most basic form, firewalls do the same kinds of work that routers do with ACLs, but firewalls can perform that packet-filtering function with many more options, as well as perform other security tasks. 

* Cisco Adaptive Security Appliance (ASA) firewall

- Like router IP ACLs, match the source and destination IP addresses 
- Like router IP ACLs, identify applications by matching their static well-known TCP and UDP ports
- Watch application-layer flows to know what additional TCP and UDP ports are used by a particular flow, and filter based on those ports
- Match the text in the URI of an HTTP request—that is, look at and compare the contents of what is often called the web address—and match patterns to decide whether to allow or deny the download of the web page identified by that URI
- Keep state information by storing information about each packet, and make decisions about filtering future packets based on the historical state information (called stateful inspection, or being a stateful firewall)

The stateful firewall feature provides the means to prevent a variety of attacks and is one of the more obvious differences from an ACL. 

A stateful firewall could be tracking the number of TCP connections per second and when it notices a large number of TCP connections, checks its state information, and then notices that the number of requests is very large from a small number of clients to that particular server,
which is typical of some kinds of DoS attacks.

#### Security Zones
Firewalls also pay close attention to which host initiates communications.

Firewalls use the concept of security zones (also called a zone for short) when defining which hosts can initiate new connections. The firewall has rules, and those rules define which host can initiate connections from one zone to another zone. Also, by using zones, a firewall can place multiple interfaces into the same zone, in cases for which multiple inter- faces should have the same security rules applied. 

Most companies have an inside and outside zone, as well as a special zone called the demilitarized zone (DMZ), a firewall security zone used to place servers that need to be available for use by users in the public Internet. 

### Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS)
A traditional intrusion prevention system (IPS) can sit in the path packets take through the network, and it can filter packets, but it makes its decisions with different logic. The IPS first downloads a database of exploit signatures. Each signature defines different header field values found in sequences of packets used by different exploits. Then the IPS can examine packets, compare them to the known exploit signatures, and notice when packets may be part of a known exploit. Once identified, the IPS can log the event, discard packets, or even redirect the packets to another security application for further examination.

The IPS applies the logic based on signatures supplied mostly by the IPS vendor. Those signatures look for these kinds of attacks:
- DoS 
- DDoS 
- Worms
- Viruses

There will be some time lag between the day when the virus has been discovered (called zero-day attacks) and when researchers have developed a virus signature. 

IPS could recognize the same virus while in flight through the network with new IPS signatures—for instance, looking for packets with a particular port and a particular hex string in the application payload. Once developed, the IPS devices in the network need to be updated with the new signature database, protecting against that virus. Both the host-based and IPS-based protections play an important role, but the fact that one IPS protects sections of a network means that the IPS can sometimes more quickly react to new threats to protect hosts.

### Cisco Next-Generation Firewalls
A next-generation firewall (NGFW) and a next-generation IPS (NGIPS) are the now-current firewall and IPS products from Cisco (current firewall product line being called Cisco Firepower firewalls)

To provide some insight into some of the newer next-generation features, consider the challenge of matching packets with ports: 
1. Each IP-based application should use a well-known port. 
2. Attackers know that firewalls will filter most well-known ports from sessions initiated from the outside zone to the inside zone.
3. Attackers use port scanning to find any port that a company’s firewall will allow through right now.
4. Attackers attempt to use a protocol of their choosing (for example, HTTP) but with the nonstandard port found through port scanning as a way to attempt to connect to hosts inside the enterprise.

A next-generation firewall that looks at the application layer data to identify the application instead of relying on the TCP and UDP port numbers used. Cisco performs their deep packet inspection using a feature called Application Visibility and Control (AVC). Cisco AVC can identify many applications based on the data sent (application layer headers plus application data structures far past the TCP and UDP headers). When used with a Cisco NGFW, instead of matching port numbers, the firewall matches the application, defeating attacks like the one just described.

- <b>Traditional firewall</b>: An NGFW performs traditional firewall features, like stateful firewall filtering, NAT/PAT, and VPN termination.
- <b>Application Visibility and Control (AVC)</b>: This feature looks deep into the application layer data to identify the application. For instance, it can identify the application based on the data, rather than port number, to defend against attacks that use random port numbers.
- <b>Advanced Malware Protection</b>: NGFW platforms run multiple security services, not just as a platform to run a separate service, but for better integration of functions. A network-based antimalware function can run on the firewall itself, blocking file transfers
that would install malware, and saving copies of files for later analysis.
- <b>URL Filtering</b>: This feature examines the URLs in each web request, categorizes the URLs, and either filters or rate limits the traffic based on rules. The Cisco Talos security group monitors and creates reputation scores for each domain known in the Internet, with URL filtering being able to use those scores in its decision to categorize, filter, or rate limit.
- <b>NGIPS</b>: The Cisco NGFW products can also run their NGIPS feature along with the firewall.

Tt makes sense that over time those functions could migrate to run on the same product. So, when the design needs both a firewall and IPS at the same location in the network, these NGFW products can run the NGIPS feature. 

### Cisco Next-Generation IPS
The hardware of NGFW and NGIPS products are the same products, with the ability to run both the NGFW and NGIPS.

traditional IPS comes with the volume of security events logged by the IPS. For instance:
1. An IPS compares the signature database, which lists all known exploits, to all messages. 
2. It generates events, often far more than the security staff can read. 
3. The staff must mentally filter events to find the proverbial needle in the haystack, possible only through hard work, vast experience, and a willingness to dig.


An NGIPS helps with this issue in a couple of ways. First, an NGIPS examines the context by gathering data from all the hosts and the users of those hosts. The NGIPS will know the OS, software revision levels, what apps are running, open ports, the transport protocols and port numbers in use, and so on. Armed with that data, the NGIPS can make much more
intelligent choices about what events to log.

NGIPS can suggest de-emphasizing checks for exploits that do not apply to those endpoints, spending more time and focus on events that could occur, greatly reducing the number of events logged.


The following list mentions a few of the Cisco NGIPS features: 
- <b>Traditional IPS</b>: An NGIPS performs traditional IPS features, like using exploit signatures to compare packet flows, creating a log of events, and possibly discarding and/or redirecting packets.
- <b>Application Visibility and Control (AVC)</b>: As with NGFWs, an NGIPS has the ability to look deep into the application layer data to identify the application.
- <b>Contextual Awareness</b>: NGFW platforms gather data from hosts—OS, software version/level, patches applied, applications running, open ports, applications currently sending data, and so on. Those facts inform the NGIPS as to the often more limited vulnerabilities in a portion of the network so that the NGIPS can focus on actual vulnerabilities while greatly reducing the number of logged events.
- <b>Reputation-Based Filtering</b>: The Cisco Talos security intelligence group researches security threats daily, building the data used by the Cisco security portfolio. Part of that data identifies known bad actors, based on IP address, domain, name, or even specific URL, with a reputation score for each. A Cisco NGIPS can perform reputation-based filtering, taking the scores into account.
- <b>Event Impact Level</b>: Security personnel need to assess the logged events, so an NGIPS provides an assessment based on impact levels, with characterizations as to the impact if
an event is indeed some kind of attack.