# Implementing Switch Port Security
## Port Security Concepts and Configuration
port security is used to restrict interfaces so that only the expected devices can use it.
When that inappropriate device attempts to send frames to the switch interface, the switch can take different actions, ranging from simply issuing informational messages to effectively shutting down the interface.

Port security identifies devices based on the source MAC address of Ethernet frames that the devices send.

Port security also has no restrictions on whether the frame came from a local device or was forwarded through other switches.

Switches enable port security per port, with different settings available per port. Each port has a maximum number of allowed MAC addresses, meaning that for all frames entering that port, only that number of different source MAC addresses can be used before port security thinks a violation has occurred. When a frame with a new source MAC address arrives, pushing the number of MAC addresses past the allowed maximum, a port security violation occurs. At that point, the switch takes action—by default, discarding all future
incoming traffic on that port.

 sticky secure MAC addresses - port security learns the MAC addresses off each port so that you do not have to preconfigure the values
## Configuring Port Security 

 1. <code>switchport mode access</code> or the <code>switchport mode trunk</code>
 2. <code>switchport port-security</code>
 3. <code>switchport port-security maximum number</code> interface subcommand to override the default maximum number of allowed MAC
 4. <code>switchport port-security violation {protect | restrict | shutdown}</code> interface subcommand to override the default action
 5.  <code>switchport port-security mac-address mac-address</code>
 6. <code>switchport port-security mac-address sticky</code>

 * default maximum source address setting of 1
 * Port security does not save the configuration of the sticky addresses, so use the copy running-config startup-config

## Verifying Port Security 

 <code># show port-security interface fastEthernet 0/1</code>

with port security, the switch no longer considers MAC addresses associated with that port as being dynamic entries as listed with the <code>show mac address-table dynamic</code> EXEC command
 
 <code>show mac address-table dynamic </code>command does not list the address and port because IOS considers that MAC table entry to be a static entry. 

* <code>show mac address-table secure</code>: Lists MAC addresses associated with ports that use port security
* <code>show mac address-table static</code>: Lists MAC addresses associated with ports that use port
security, as well as any other statically defined MAC addresses

## Port Security Violation Modes
With port security, each switch port can be configured to use one of three violation modes that defines the actions to take when a violation occurs. All three options cause the switch to discard the offending frame 

 | <code>switchport port-security violation {}</code>  | Protect  | Restrict  | Shutdown  |  
|---|---|---|---|
| Discards offending traffic  | X  | X  | X  |  
| Sends log and SNMP messages  | -  | X  | X  |  
| Disables the interface by putting it in an err-disabled state, discarding all traffic  | -  | -  | X  |
||||.|

### Port Security Shutdown Mode
- The switch interface state (per show interfaces and show interfaces status) changes to an err-disabled state .
- The switch interface port security state (per show port-security) changes to a securedown state.
- The switch stops sending and receiving frames on the interface.

* <code>errdisable recovery cause psecure-violation</code>: A global command to enable automatic recovery for interfaces in an err-disabled state caused by port security
* <code>errdisable recovery interval seconds</code>: A global command to set the time to wait before recovering the interface

The output of the <code>show port-security interface</code> command lists the current port-security status (secure-shutdown) as well as the configured mode (shutdown). The last line of output lists the number of violations that caused the interface to fail to an err-disabled state, while the second-to-last line identifies the MAC address and VLAN of the device that caused the violation.

Note that the violations counter notes the number of times the interface has been moved to the err-disabled (secure-shutdown) state. For instance, the first time it fails, the counter increments to 1; while err-disabled, many frames can arrive, but the counter remains at 1. Later, after an engineer has recovered the interface from the err-disabled state with a shutdown/no shutdown, another violation that causes the interface to fail to an err-disabled state will cause the counter to increment to 2.

### Port Security Protect and Restrict Modes
These modes still discard offending traffic, but the interface remains in a connected (up/ up) state and in a port security state of secure-up. As a result, the port continues to forward good traffic but discards offending traffic.

Having a port in a seemingly good state that also discards traffic can be a challenge when troubleshooting.

With protect mode, the only action the switch takes for a frame that violates the port security rules is to discard the frame. The switch does not change the port to an err-disabled state, does not generate messages, and does not even increment the violations counter.

in restrict mode the port status would have also remained in a secure-up state; however, IOS would show some indication of port security activity, such as an accurate incrementing violation counter, as well
as syslog messages.

    01:46:58: %PORT_SECURITY-2-PSECURE_VIOLATION: Security violation occurred, caused by MAC address 0200.3333.3333 on port FastEthernet0/13