# Implementing DHCP
## Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
DHCP allows both the permanent assignment of host addresses, but more commonly, DHCP assigns a temporary lease of IP addresses. it also enables mobility. 

<code> ip helper-address server-ip</code>

### DHCP Concepts
DHCP uses the following four messages between the client and server:

* <b>Discover</b>: Sent by the DHCP client to find a willing DHCP server 
* <b>Offer</b>: Sent by a DHCP server to offer to lease to that client a specific IP address (and inform the client of its other parameters) 
* <b>Request</b>: Sent by the DHCP client to ask the server to lease the IPv4 address listed in the Offer message 
* <b>Acknowledgment</b>: Sent by the DHCP server to assign the address and to list the mask,default router, and DNS server IP addresses

DHCP messages make use of two special IPv4 addresses that allow a host that has no IP address to still be able to send and receive messages on the local subnet : 
- 0.0.0.0: An address reserved for use as a source IPv4 address for hosts that do not yet have an IP address. 
- 255.255.255.255: The local broadcast IP address. Packets sent to this destination address are broadcast on the local data link, but routers do not forward them.

A client sends a Discover message, with source IP address of 0.0.0.0 because it does not have an IP address to use yet. It sends the packet to destination 255.255.255.255, which is sent in a LAN broadcast frame, reaching all hosts in the subnet.  ( assuming the DHCP client chooses to use a DHCP option called the broadcast flag). The server sets the destination IP address to 255.255.255.255 againsince the client still does not have an IP address. 

The rest of the hosts will receive the Offer message, but notice that the message lists another device’s DHCP client ID (host’s MAC address), so the rest of the hosts ignore the Offer message .

The ip helper-address server-ip subcommand tells the router to do the following for the messages coming in an interface, from a DHCP client:

1. Watch for incoming DHCP messages, with destination IP address 255.255.255.255. 
2. Change that packet’s source IP address to the router’s incoming interface IP address. 
3. Change that packet’s destination IP address to the address of the DHCP server (as configured in the ip helper-address command).
4. Route the packet to the DHCP server.

    This feature, by which a router relays DHCP messages by changing the IP addresses in the packet header, is called DHCP relay.

## DHCP Server
* Subnet ID and mask
* Reserved (excluded) addresses: addresses in the subnet to not lease. This list allows the engineer to reserve addresses to be used as static IP addresses. For example, most router and switch IP addresses, server addresses, and addresses of most anything other than user devices use a statically assigned IP address.
* Default router(s)
* DNS IP address(es

The configuration can list other parameters as well. For example, it can set the time limit for leasing an IP address. If the client does not renew, the server can reclaim the IP address and put it back in the pool of available IP addresses.

### Allocation modes :
* <b>Dynamic allocation</b>
* <b>Automatic allocation</b> : DHCP lease time to infinite
* <b>Static allocation</b> : preconfigures the specific IP address for a client based on the client’s MAC address

## DHCP Client 
<code>(config-if)# ip address dhcp</code><br>
<code># show dhcp lease</code><br>
<code># show ip default-gateway</code>

The DHCP process supplies a default gateway IP address to router, but routers do not normally use a default gateway setting; only hosts use a default gateway setting. However, the router takes advantage of that information by turning that default gateway IP address into the basis for a default route, as the next-hop address, and later distribute that default route to the rest of the routers using an interior routing protocol like OSPF

    Routers turn the default gateway IP address into the basis for a default route.


## Identifying Host IPv4 Settings

- <code> ipconfig</code> and <code>ipconfig /all </code> on windows machines list the address, mask, and default gateway, with the ipconfig /all command also listing the DNS server settings.
-  <code>netstat -rn</code>  lists the host’s IP routing table. 
- <code>ifconfig</code>, <code>networksetup -getinfo</code>, and <code>networksetup -getdnsservers</code> on MacOS