# DHCP Snooping and ARP Inspection

## DHCP Snooping
Operates on LAN switches and is commonly used on Layer 2 LAN switches and enabled on Layer 2 ports with each port being trusted or untrusted by DHCP Snooping.

* received on an untrusted port, for messages normally sent by a server, will always be discarded.
* received on an untrusted port, as normally sent by a DHCP client, may be filtered if they appear to be part of an attack.
* received on a trusted port will be forwarded; trusted ports do not filter (discard) any DHCP messages.

### Spurious DHCP Server

DHCP clients also use the <b>DHCP RELEASE</b> and <b>DHCP DECLINE</b> messages. When a client has a working lease for an address but no longer wants to use the address, the DHCP client can tell the DHCP server it no longer needs the address, releasing it back to the DHCP server, with the DHCP RELEASE message. Similarly, a client can send a DHCP
DECLINE message to turn down the use of an IP address

1. Examine all incoming DHCP messages. 
2. If normally sent by servers, discard the message. 
3. If normally sent by clients, filter as follows: 
    * a. For DISCOVER and REQUEST messages, check for MAC address consistency between the Ethernet frame and the DHCP message.
    * b. For RELEASE or DECLINE messages, check the incoming interface plus IP address versus the DHCP Snooping binding table.
4. For messages not filtered that result in a DHCP lease, build a new entry to the DHCP
Snooping binding table.

### DHCP Snooping Configuration

    ip dhcp snooping 
    ip dhcp snooping vlan 11
    no ip dhcp snooping information option 
    !
    interface GigabitEthernet1/0/2
    ip dhcp snooping trust

<code>#  show ip dhcp snooping</code>

Insertion of option 82 is disabled: confirms the addition of the no ip dhcp information option

When the switch does not also act as a DHCP relay agent, the default setting stops DHCP from working for end users. The switch sets fields in the DHCP messages as if it were a DHCP relay agent, but the changes to those messages cause most DHCP servers (and most DHCP relay agents) to ignore the received DHCP messages.

The conclusion: To make DHCP Snooping work on a switch that is not also a DHCP relay agent, disable the option 82 feature using the no ip dhcp snooping information option global command


### Limiting DHCP Message Rates
DHCP Snooping uses the general-purpose CPU in a switch. If incoming DHCP messages exceeds that limit over a one-second period, DHCP Snooping treats the event as an attack and moves the port to an err-disabled state

<code> ip dhcp snooping rate limit number</code>


    errdisable recovery cause dhcp-rate-limit errdisable recovery interval 30 !
    interface GigabitEthernet1/0/2
     ip  dhcp snooping limit rate 10
    !
    interface GigabitEthernet1/0/3
      ip dhcp snooping limit rate 2

<code> # show ip dhcp snooping </code>

## Dynamic ARP Inspection
 Dynamic ARP Inspection (DAI) examines incoming ARP messages on untrusted ports to filter those it believes to be part of an attack. Compares incoming ARP messages with two sources of data: the DHCP Snooping binding table and any configured ARP ACLs.

 Attackers can just send an ARP reply —called a gratuitous ARP— triggering hosts to add incorrect ARP entries to their ARP tables

 ### Gratious ARP
A host might also want to inform all the hosts in the subnet about its MAC address. That might be useful when a host changes its MAC address, for instance. So, ARP supports the idea of a gratuitous ARP message with these features: 
 * It is an ARP reply.
 *  It is sent without having first received an ARP request.
 *  It is sent to an Ethernet destination broadcast address

 ### DAI Logic 
    ! DHCP happens first, then ARP

DAI takes an approach for untrusted interfaces tha confirms an ARP’s correctness based on DHCP Snooping’s data about the earlier DHCP messages. The correct normal DHCP messages list the IP address leased to a host as well as that host’s MAC address. The DHCP Snooping feature also records those facts into the switch’s DHCP Snooping binding table.
For any DAI untrusted ports, DAI compares the ARP message’s origin IP and origin MAC address fields to the DHCP Snooping binding table. If found in the table, DAI allows the
ARP through, but if not, DAI discards the ARP. 

DAI looks for both the DCHP Snooping binding data and ARP ACLs.  DAI can optionally perform other checks as well. For instance, the Ethernet header that encapsulates the ARP should have addresses that match
the ARP origin and target MAC addresses.

DAI discards these messages: 
* Messages with an Ethernet header source MAC address that is not equal to the ARP origin hardware (MAC) address
* ARP reply messages with an Ethernet header destination MAC address that is not equal to the ARP target hardware (MAC) address
* Messages with unexpected IP addresses in the two ARP IP address fields

### Configuring ARP Inspection on a Layer 2 Switch

* Choose whether to rely on DHCP Snooping, ARP ACLs, or both.
* If using DHCP Snooping, configure it and make the correct ports trusted for DHCP Snooping .
* Choose the VLAN(s) on which to enable DAI. 
* Make DAI trusted (rather than the default setting of untrusted) on select ports in thoseVLANs, typically for the same ports you trusted for DHCP Snooping.


#### IP ARP Inspection Configuration :
        ip arp inspection vlan 11 
        !
        interface GigabitEthernet1/0/2
          ip arp inspection trust
#### IP DHCP Snooping Configuration Added to Support DAI : 
        ip arp inspection vlan 11 
        ip dhcp snooping
        ip dhcp snooping vlan 11
        no ip dhcp snooping information option 
        !
        interface GigabitEthernet1/0/2 
        ip dhcp snooping trust
        ip arp inspection trust

#### ARP and DHCP Snooping verification
<code># show ip arp inspection </code><br>
<code># show ip arp inspection statistics</code><br>
<code># show ip dhcp snooping binding</code>

### Limiting DAI Message Rates
DAI can also be the focus of a DoS attack.
* DAI defaults to use rate limits for all interfaces (trusted and untrusted), with DHCP Snooping defaulting to not use rate limits.
* DAI allows the configuration of a burst interval (a number of seconds), so that the rate limit can have logic like “x ARP messages over y seconds” (DHCP Snooping does notdefine a burst setting).

#### Configuring ARP Inspection Message Rate Limits
    errdisable recovery cause dhcp-rate-limit 
    errdisable recovery cause arp-inspection 
    errdisable recovery interval 30 
    !
    interface GigabitEthernet1/0/2 
    ip dhcp snooping limit rate 10 
    ip arp inspection limit rate 8
    !
    interface GigabitEthernet1/0/3 
    ip dhcp snooping limit rate 2
    ip arp inspection limit rate 8 burst interval 4

<code># show ip arp inspection interfaces</code>

#### Configuring Optional DAI Message Checks
    SW2(config)# ip arp inspection validate ? 
      dst-mac Validate destination MAC address 
      ip Validate IP addresses
      src-mac Validate source MAC address
<code># show ip arp inspection</code>

### DHCP Snooping Configuration Summary
    Step 1. Configure this pair of commands (both required): 
      A. Use the ip dhcp snooping global command to enable DHCP Snooping on the switch.
      B. Use the ip dhcp snooping vlan vlan-list global command to identify the VLANs on which to use DHCP Snooping.
    Step 2. (Optional): Use the no ip dhcp snooping information option global command on Layer 2 switches to disable the insertion of DHCP Option 82 data into DHCP messages, specifically on switches that do not act as a DHCP relay agent.
    Step 3. Configure the ip dhcp snooping trust interface subcommand to override the default setting of not trusted.
    Step 4. (Optional): Configure DHCP Snooping rate limits and err-disabled recovery: 
      Step A. (Optional): Configure the ip dhcp snooping limit rate number interface subcommand to set a limit of DHCP messages per second.
      Step B. (Optional): Configure the no ip dhcp snooping limit rate number interface subcommand to remove an existing limit and reset the interface to use the default of no rate limit.
      Step C. (Optional): Configure the errdisable recovery cause dhcp-rate-limit global command to enable the feature of automatic recovery from err-disabled mode, assuming the switch placed the port in err-disabled state because of exceeding DHCP Snooping rate limits.
      Step D. (Optional): Configure the errdisable recovery interval seconds global commands to set the time to wait before recovering from an interface err-disabled state (regardless of the cause of the err-disabledstate) . 

### IP ARP Inspection Configuration Summary
    Step 1. Use the ip arp inspection vlan vlan-list global command to enable Dynamic ARP Inspection (DAI) on the switch for the specified VLANs.
    Config Checklist
    Step 2. Separate from the DAI configuration, also configure DHCP Snooping and/or ARP ACLs for use by DAI.
    Step 3. Configure the ip arp inspection trust interface subcommand to override the default setting of not trusted.
    Step 4. (Optional): Configure DAI rate limits and err-disabled recovery:
        Step A. (Optional): Configure the ip arp inspection limit rate number [burst interval seconds] interface subcommand to set a limit of ARP messages per second, or ARP messages for each configured interval.
        Step B. (Optional): Configure the ip arp inspection limit rate none interface subcommand to disable rate limits.
        Step C. (Optional): Configure the errdisable recovery cause arp-inspection global command to enable the feature of automatic recovery from err-disabled mode, assuming the switch placed the port in err-disabled state because of exceeding DAI rate limits.
        Step D. (Optional): Configure the errdisable recovery interval seconds global commands to set the time to wait before recovering from an interface err-disabled state (regardless of the cause of the err-disabled state).
    Step 5. (Optional): Configure the ip arp inspection validate {[dst-mac] [src-mac] [ip]}global command to add DAI validation steps .