# Device Management Protocols
## System Message Logging (Syslog)
By default <code>logging console</code> global configuration command.

 <code>logging monitor</code> tells IOS to enable the sending of log messages to all logged users when they issue the <code>terminal monitor</code> EXEC command

### Storing Log Messages
<code>logging buffered</code> global command to store log messages in RAM. 
<br><code>show logging</code> EXEC command to see those messages. 
<br><code>logging host {address | hostname}</code> to store log messages centrally to a syslog server. RFC 5424 defines the syslog protocol, which provides the means by which a device like a switch or router can use a UDP protocol to send messages to a syslog server for storage.

### Log Message Format
    *Dec 18 17:10:15.079: %LINEPROTO-5-UPDOWN: Line protocol on Interface FastEthernet0/0, changed state to down
* A timestamp: *Dec 18 17:10:15.079 
* The facility on the router that generated the message: %LINEPROTO The severity level: 5
* A mnemonic for the message: UPDOWN
* The description of the message: Line protocol on Interface FastEthernet0/0, changed state to down
#### Disabling Timestamps and Enabling Sequence Numbers
        R1(config)# no service timestamps 
        R1(config)# service sequence-numbers

### Log Message Severity Levels

|Keyword|Numeral|Description||
|---|---|---|---|
|Emergency|0|System unusable|Severe|
|Alert|1|Immediate action required|Severe|
|Critical|2|Critical Event (Highest of 3)|Impactful|
|Error|3|Error Event (Middle of 3)|Impactful|
|Warning|4|Warning Event (Lowest of 3)|Impactful|
|Notification|5|Normal, More Important|Normal|
|Information|6|Normal, Less Important|Normal|
|Debug|7|Requested by User Debug|Debug|

<code>logging console 4</code> causes IOS to send severity level 0–4 messages to the console

### Configuring and Verifying System Logging
    logging console 7 
    logging monitor debug 
    logging buffered 4
    logging host 172.16.3.9
    logging trap warning

<code># show logging</code>
### Debug Command
<code># debug ip ospf hello</code><br>
! a user who connects to R1 would need to also issue the terminal monitor command to see those debug messages

## Network Time Protocol (NTP)
NTP defines the sources of time data (reference clocks) and how good each time source is (stratum)
### Setting the Time and Timezone
    R1(config)# clock timezone EST -5 
    R1(config)# clock summer-time EDT recurring
    R1# clock set 20:52:49 21 October 2015
    R1# show clock
### Basic NTP Configuration
<code>ntp master {stratum-level}</code>: NTP server mode
<br><code>ntp server {address | hostname}</code>: NTP client/server mode. NTP client, to synchronize time with a server. Once synchronized, the device can then act as an NTP server, to supply time to other NTP clients.
<br><code># show ntp status</code>
<br><code># show ntp associations</code>

### NTP Reference Clock and Stratum
NTP client/server mode, the device uses the NTP client function to learn the time. NTP client adds 1 to the stratum level it learns from its NTP server. The default setting of 8 for the stratum level in the <code>ntp master [stratum-level]</code>

### Redundant NTP Configuration
Enterprise NTP configuration ought to refer to at least two external NTP servers for redundancy. Additionally, just a few enterprise devices should refer to
those external NTP servers and then act as both NTP client and server.

    ntp server time-a-b-nist.gov 
    ntp server time-a-g.nist.gov
    ntp master 7

### NTP Using a Loopback Interface
 Loopback interface can be assigned an IP address, routing protocols can advertise about the subnet, and you can ping/ traceroute to that address.

    ! Configuration on R2 for its server function 
    interface loopback 0
      ip address 172.16.9.9 255.255.255.0 
    ! 
    ntp master 4
    ntp source loopback 0

## Analyzing Topology Using CDP and LLDP
Cisco Discovery Protocol (CDP) and the Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP)

### Examining Information Learned by CDP
* <b>Device identifier</b>: Typically the host name 
* <b>Address list</b>: Network and data-link addresses 
* <b>Port identifier</b>: The interface on the remote router or switch on the other end of the link that sent the CDP advertisement
* <b>Capabilities list</b>: Information on what type of device it is (for example, a router or a switch)
* <b>Platform</b>: The model and OS level running on the device

|Command||
|---|---|
|<code>show cdp neighbors [type number]</code>|Lists one summary line of information about each neighbor or just the neighbor found on a specific interface if an interface was listed|
|<code>show cdp neighbors detail</code>|Lists one large set (approximately 15 lines) of information, one set for every neighbor|
|<code>show cdp entry name</code>|Lists the same information as the show cdp neighbors detail command, but only for the named neighbor (case sensitive)|

 CDP defines encapsulation that uses the data-link header, but no IP header. It uses a multicast destination MAC address (0100.0CCC.CCCC). However, when any device that supports CDP receives a CP message, the device processes the message and then discards it, rather than forwarding it.
 <br>! CDP shows information about directly connected neighbors. 

 ### Configuring and Verifying CDP
 IOS typically enables CDP globally and on each interface by default. You can then disable CDP per interface with the <code>no cdp enable</code> interface subcommand and later re-enable it with the <code>cdp enable</code> interface subcommand. To disable and re-enable CDP globally on the
device, use the <code>no cdp run</code> and <code>cdp run</code> global commands
<br>
|||
|---|---|
|<code>show cdp</code>|States whether CDP is enabled globally and lists the default update and holdtime timers|
|<code>show cdp interface [type number]</code>|States whether CDP is enabled on each interface, or a single interface if the interface is listed, and states update and holdtime timers on thoseinterfaces|
|<code>show cdp traffic</code>|Lists global statistics for the number of CDP advertisements sent and received|

CDP sends messages every 60 seconds by default, with a hold time of 180 seconds. The hold time tells the device how long to wait after no longer hearing from a device before removing those details from the CDP tables. You can overridethe defaults with the <code>cdp timer seconds</code> and <code>cdp holdtime seconds</code> global commands.

### Examining Information Learned by LLDP
IEEE standard 802.1AB LLDP has similar configuration and practically identical show commands as compared with CDP.

* LLDP uses B as the capability code for switching, referring to bridge, a term for the device type that existed before switches that performed the same basic functions.
* LLDP does not identify IGMP as a capability, while CDP does (I). 
* CDP lists the neighbor’s platform, a code that defines the device type, while LLDP does not.
* LLDP lists capabilities with different conventions 

CDP lists all the capabilities of the neighbor in the <code>show cdp neighbors</code> command output, no matter whether the device currently enables all those features. LLDP instead lists the enables (configured) capabilities,
rather than all supported capabilities, in the output from <code>show lldp neighbors</code>

### Configuring and Verifying LLDP
Cisco devices default to disable LLDP. Additionally, LLDP separates the sending and receiving of LLDP messages as separate functions. For instance, LLDP support processing receives LLDP messages on an interface so that the switch or router learns about the neighboring device while not transmitting LLDP messages to the neighboring device.

The three LLDP configuration commands are as follows: 
* <code>[no] lldp run</code>: A global configuration command that sets the default mode of LLDP operation for any interface that does not have more specific LLDP subcommands (lldp transmit, lldp receive). The lldp run global command enables LLDP in both directions on those interfaces, while no lldp run disables LLDP.
* <code>[no] lldp transmit</code>: An interface subcommand that defines the operation of LLDP on the interface regardless of the global [no] lldp run command. The lldp transmit interface subcommand causes the device to transmit LLDP messages, while no lldp transmit causes it to not transmit LLDP messages.
* <code>[no] lldp receive</code>: An interface subcommand that defines the operation of LLDP on the interface regardless of the global [no] lldp run command. The lldp receive interface subcommand causes the device to process received LLDP messages, while no lldp receive
causes it to not process received LLDP messages.

like CDP, LLDP uses a send timer and hold timer for the same purposes as CDP with default settings of 30 seconds for the send timer and 120 seconds for the hold timer. You can override the defaults with the <code>lldp timer seconds</code> and <code>lldp holdtime seconds</code>